[Amit Varma]: Ever since the farm bills were passed, I have been inundated with requests to do an episode
[Amit Varma]: on them. One reason I took my time was that I was figuring them out myself. This is a
[Amit Varma]: complex issue. There are many aspects to these bills. And to me, the big issue now is not
[Amit Varma]: just the content of the bills, but the way in which they were pushed through, and then
[Amit Varma]: the way in which our government is treating the protesting farmers. I've often said that
[Amit Varma]: the end does not justify the means. And this is an illustration of that. Now I know that
[Amit Varma]: nuance can sometimes be looked upon as hedging or straddling the fence. In these times where
[Amit Varma]: so much of the discourse is polarized and partisan, there's pressure on everyone to
[Amit Varma]: think only in terms of black and white. Pick a tribe and go with it. Don't evaluate each
[Amit Varma]: issue on its own. But that's not me. So at the risk of all sides coming down hard on
[Amit Varma]: me, let me just say that it's possible to hold a series of parallel thoughts on an issue
[Amit Varma]: as complicated as this. I've written about agriculture for a couple of decades. I've
[Amit Varma]: written about Indian politics for a couple of decades. I've done many episodes on both
[Amit Varma]: subjects. And if I have to sum up what I feel about these farm bills from these two vantage
[Amit Varma]: points, here's what I would say. One, while I have some quibbles with the content of the
[Amit Varma]: bills, I think they go in the right direction. They empower farmers with choice without taking
[Amit Varma]: anything away from them. Much of the rhetoric against these bills is unfounded and I discussed
[Amit Varma]: some of it in this episode. However, the end doesn't justify the means. The way the government
[Amit Varma]: pushed these bills through was disgraceful and I don't even have words to describe the
[Amit Varma]: contemptible manner in which this government is treating the dissenting farmers. Dissent
[Amit Varma]: is an important part of our democracy. The farmers have a right to protest and the government
[Amit Varma]: needs to engage with them respectfully. Instead, the farmers have been called terrorists and
[Amit Varma]: anti-nationals. While the reforms may have been crafted by some fine thinkers, the government's
[Amit Varma]: strategy towards handling these protests seems to have been formulated by the IT cell. Statesmanship
[Amit Varma]: could have solved this problem. Instead, we have thuggery of the most base kind. And this
[Amit Varma]: question now comes to my mind. What's the point of trying to save agriculture if on
[Amit Varma]: the way you damage our democracy?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Ajay Shah, co-author of the brilliant
[Amit Varma]: book In Service of the Republic, on which I did a popular episode last year. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: Ajay has been on the show a few times before and every time I speak to him, I feel like
[Amit Varma]: my brain has expanded. I invited him on this episode because I came across some of his
[Amit Varma]: writing on agriculture and as always was blown away by his clarity of thought. I've done
[Amit Varma]: many episodes on agriculture myself, including with the farmer leader, Gunwant Patil, and
[Amit Varma]: written a lot about it as well. All those episodes and essays will be linked in the
[Amit Varma]: show notes. Now, before you begin listening to our conversation, I should warn you that
[Amit Varma]: we only get to talking about the farm bills halfway through the episode. I enjoy discursive
[Amit Varma]: conversations, especially with someone like Ajay, who is such a polymath. I enjoyed picking
[Amit Varma]: his brain on a variety of subjects and we spent a fair bit of the first hour talking
[Amit Varma]: about how he learns new subjects, his approach to knowledge management, how he's made himself
[Amit Varma]: into a health economist over the last few months, the crucial difference between public
[Amit Varma]: health and healthcare, how we could have tackled this pandemic differently, and what we can
[Amit Varma]: still do moving forward. Much illumination. And I hope you enjoy this episode. But before
[Amit Varma]: we begin, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a unique problem. This is a commercial break. And this week, I don't actually have
[Amit Varma]: a commercial for you. I can't even plug the online courses I teach because they're closed
[Amit Varma]: for registration right now. And they open again in March. So let me not sell anything
[Amit Varma]: to you. But instead, express my gratitude at being such a committed bunch of listeners.
[Amit Varma]: Social media can often be unpleasant and toxic. The level of discourse can be shallow and
[Amit Varma]: angry. But whenever I interact with listeners of the show, I feel like I am in a good place.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, you just want a good conversation. You're not looking at narratives that confirm
[Amit Varma]: your beliefs. You're open to having your thinking challenged, and your worldview expanded. And
[Amit Varma]: even when you disagree with me or my guest, you're not judgmental. We are not evil or
[Amit Varma]: stupid because we hold different opinions. And while a podcast may seem like a one way
[Amit Varma]: street, I produce content you listen. This is more than that to me. I feel like I am
[Amit Varma]: one cog in a silent community of people who care about ideas and who acknowledge each
[Amit Varma]: other's humanity. So while I usually say this at the end of my show, I'll also say it now.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Ajay, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me here as always.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about, you know, your last few months, like when I invited you for the show,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned that at this moment in time, your primary hat is that of a health economist,
[Amit Varma]: which took me a little bit by surprise or not too much by surprise, because you are
[Amit Varma]: one of those economists who always kind of goes back to first principles and sort of
[Amit Varma]: figuring out everything from there. So one would imagine that anything that you get interested
[Amit Varma]: in would be easy for you to figure out and, you know, hack, so to speak. So tell me how
[Amit Varma]: your last few months have been. Have you been stuck at home during COVID? What have you
[Amit Varma]: been doing? I hope you haven't actually caught it at any point. And intellectually, what
[Amit Varma]: have you been thinking about? What are the problems that have interested you?
[Guest]: No, I have not been got sick myself. I did get an antibody test once because somebody
[Guest]: that I was with tested positive, but no, no luck so far in terms of getting sick. About
[Guest]: five years ago, I had started working systematically in health economics. And so in some sense,
[Guest]: by early 2020, my mind was ready for it. So my colleagues and I had done many, many things
[Guest]: in the field of health. We had written an eclectic array of papers, mostly first principles,
[Guest]: thinking of how you should think about health. You may have noticed that in the book that
[Guest]: Vijay Kelkar and I wrote, one of the four chapters, which is a demo of applying this
[Guest]: conceptual framework was actually health. So that's an illustration of how we were approaching
[Guest]: these things. And so in some sense, my mind was primed and ready for the story of COVID-19,
[Guest]: which started unfolding from December 2019 onwards on the global consciousness, when
[Guest]: we started seeing things happen first in China and then in Italy. I remember on the 6th of
[Guest]: February, I wrote an article in the Business Standard, which has the title, dodging a bullet
[Guest]: question mark, where I'm gently trying to say, guys, there's something big coming and
[Guest]: potentially this could be pretty bad for us in India. By middle February, late February,
[Guest]: my co-authors and I were writing a policy paper on what India should think about COVID-19.
[Guest]: And it was considered a very alarmist paper at the time, because it did some simple mathematics
[Guest]: of multiplying infection fatality rates observed elsewhere in the world into the number of
[Guest]: people in India that might get infected. And then came the extremities of the lockdowns
[Guest]: in late March. And I felt very nervous through those months about the tension between prevention
[Guest]: and cure, that the Indian public health apparatus was really not up to it. So, you know, we
[Guest]: were doing draconian things like a lockdown, and we were just not doing the genuine public
[Guest]: health machinery, which in this case is contact tracing. What you need is a sophisticated
[Guest]: health worker who will sit with an infected person and chat about what you were doing
[Guest]: for the last one week, and find out all the people that you might have exposed, and then
[Guest]: reach out to them, test them, and keep going forward. We didn't have that state capacity.
[Guest]: We never built that state capacity. As usual in India, we had the technology delusion that
[Guest]: we'll build some app and magically the problems of public policy will go away. And again,
[Guest]: I thought that was not a very wise way to approach it. And side by side with that, the
[Guest]: lockdowns were imposing costs on the economy, on livelihoods, on the working of the health
[Guest]: care system. So I was watching that whole drama unfolding. And more recently, my colleagues
[Guest]: and I have been working on trying to estimate the number of excess deaths that took place
[Guest]: in the country. So I've been full of COVID-19 through all this. My last and most recent
[Guest]: work has been on vaccines. And I feel reasonably uncomfortable with the state-led process for
[Guest]: vaccines. Because in India, we don't have the government machinery to manage vaccination
[Guest]: on a nationwide scale. It would be far more effective to let the self-organizing system
[Guest]: figure it out. That we're holding many private vendors. There should be import of vaccines.
[Guest]: And we should let firms and employers figure out how to get it to their employees. Let
[Guest]: private health care companies work. And I feel we are needlessly trying to do a big
[Guest]: centrally planned thing when we don't have the state capacity to do these things.
[Guest]: So this has been the fun stuff I've been doing in the last one year. Precisely one year ago
[Guest]: on February 5th is where I started on this subject. Because on the 6th of February, I
[Guest]: have an article in the BS.
[Amit Varma]: To get a little meta, and you of course like to get meta with everything and so do I. So
[Amit Varma]: to get a little meta about you, you know, when you approach a subject, what is the lens
[Amit Varma]: through which you approach it? Like one lens which I've kind of started formulating for
[Amit Varma]: myself when I start learning about something or thinking about something is what I call
[Amit Varma]: the back and beyond framework, which is first I go back to first principles or root causes
[Amit Varma]: and try to understand it through that. And then I think beyond first order effects and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. Now it strikes me that someone like you who you know, your book in
[Amit Varma]: service of the Republic on which we did a very popular episode, has you doing exactly
[Amit Varma]: the same thing to public policy kind of going back to first principles and so on. So is
[Amit Varma]: that a discipline of thinking about a subject that you apply to everything that you come
[Amit Varma]: across? For example, if you were to cook, would you again, go back to first principles
[Amit Varma]: and try to figure things out that way? And that's question number one. And question number
[Amit Varma]: two, what do you do for information assimilation? Because obviously, I'm assuming that you are
[Amit Varma]: someone who reads a lot, you know, do you have specific tools for knowledge management?
[Amit Varma]: How do you kind of organize everything that you're taking in?
[Guest]: Many many things. So one at a time. In the world of public policy, my basic machinery
[Guest]: is to have some intuition into the self organizing system. I think that is a single grand idea
[Guest]: that human beings are sentient, maximizing creatures and human beings will try to form
[Guest]: solutions, will learn to work with each other and that there is more coordination and collaboration
[Guest]: muscle that meets the eye. And human beings don't need to be told what to do. And public
[Guest]: choice theory shows us how the telling human beings what to do very often goes wrong.
[Guest]: Stepping a little away from public policy as a field. Oh, yes, I'm a science geek. I'm
[Guest]: a researcher. I do everything as a research project. So every single thing that I do in
[Guest]: life is the business of understanding it completely going down to first principles, reading research
[Guest]: papers. So I'm blessed today that I can read research papers in almost any subject in the
[Guest]: world that my broad knowledge today is such that I can read contemporary research articles
[Guest]: and have some plausible level of understanding of essentially any field in the world.
[Guest]: So my port of call for everything is Google Scholar. So my first search on most subjects
[Guest]: is Google Scholar. I land up in Google Scholar. I start reading research papers and I can
[Guest]: generally figure out things that are going on in a very wide area of fields. It could
[Guest]: be gamma ray bursts and their impact on life on earth, or it could be Ayurvedic recipes
[Guest]: for impacting on the immune system, or of course, economics, mathematics, statistics.
[Guest]: You mentioned cooking. Yes, very much. I know a fair bit about food science. Then I apply
[Guest]: my usual research recipes for innovation, which is a very standard trick and almost
[Guest]: industrializable trick is to do combinatorial innovation. Okay. I consider it the trivialest
[Guest]: thing in the world. I wonder why more people in the world don't do it. It roughly works
[Guest]: like this, that if kajar halwa tastes pretty good with sugar, then maybe we should experiment
[Guest]: with all the other sweeteners out there that try jaggery, try maple syrup, try honey. Okay.
[Guest]: And see which of them works better. So it's just a analogies technology of rolling out
[Guest]: many variants and picking one that works reasonably well. So this is an almost trivial way to
[Guest]: innovate in any field that when we were in this situation in another field, we found
[Guest]: that X approach worked reasonably well. Why don't we try that here? So that's where breadth
[Guest]: is a great asset. Whereas narrow technical specialists tend to not be able to make those
[Guest]: analogies of pulling in ideas from other fields. Finally, my recipe for learning new fields.
[Guest]: So I said that about five years ago, I started doing health. My standard recipe for starting
[Guest]: a new field is to first play on adjacencies. So I recognized five years ago that I'm not
[Guest]: an expert on health, but I was an expert on many connected things. So as an example, I
[Guest]: knew a lot about finance. So natural place to go was, can we learn about health insurance?
[Guest]: Okay. And the entire FSLRC technology is a great way to understand IRDA and health insurance
[Guest]: and government run health insurance programs. And so that's a natural way to make inroads
[Guest]: into a new field, which is take the adjacencies. Similarly, as simple technology that my colleagues
[Guest]: and I do better than most is to work with data, is to statistically analyze data, is
[Guest]: to be able to understand what's going on in large complex datasets. So we have been pioneers
[Guest]: in putting big datasets to work on understanding health and we managed to get many interesting
[Guest]: innovations out of that. So this is on how to approach a new field. And finally, you
[Guest]: talked about information management. I think that there is only one, okay, maybe two, three
[Guest]: non-standard things that I do. The first is that my prime source of the flow of new information
[Guest]: is RSS. So good old fashioned RSS feed reader that I'm highly selective about what feeds
[Guest]: I subscribe to. I have about 100 feeds that I subscribe to, and they are my window in
[Guest]: the world. And my second recipe is that I'm generally not looking at anything in the world
[Guest]: of social media, so that I try to protect myself from the noise and stay connected to
[Guest]: the deeper things. So I take journal articles seriously. I read working papers, I read blogs.
[Guest]: I think this is the way to keep sane in the modern world.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And you mentioned about how, you know, you got into health economics five years ago.
[Amit Varma]: For the benefit of my listeners, what is health economics?
[Guest]: Health economics is the study of the causes and consequences of sickness and health. So
[Guest]: we'd like to understand from cradle to grave, people being born, people achieving the full
[Guest]: potentiality of height and strength as adults about experiences with sickness, about what
[Guest]: determines death, and the whole interaction between prevention and cure about a problem
[Guest]: like air quality that is damaging the health of people in very fundamental ways. And also
[Guest]: the whole health care process that you get sick, you try to go to a provider, you try
[Guest]: to get better and the whole incentives of how the health care industry treats each of
[Guest]: us and what generates good and bad outcomes in the behavior of health care. So this is
[Guest]: cradle to grave understanding the causes and consequences of our health, that is health
[Amit Varma]: economics.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things I've noticed about, you know, the last few months in various domains
[Amit Varma]: is that there are many things that are normalized and you kind of take them for granted, but
[Amit Varma]: then there is a crisis and those things come to stark attention, they kind of stand out
[Amit Varma]: more because of the crisis, while earlier they were, in a sense, normalized, like I
[Amit Varma]: just recently did an episode with an activist called Ruben Mascarena. So, you know, did
[Amit Varma]: a Khana Chahiye campaign in Bombay, where there was an explosion of hunger in the streets.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that it brought into stark relief is what a large number of Indians
[Amit Varma]: are actually living such precarious lives that just one crisis, one emergency can send
[Amit Varma]: them toppling over the edge into something as stark as, you know, not knowing where the
[Amit Varma]: next meal is going to come from. And that's just one context, which immediately comes
[Amit Varma]: to mind because of just on that episode. But, you know, over the last few months, if you
[Amit Varma]: had to look at both health economics and otherwise our economy, are there aspects like that,
[Amit Varma]: which you think came to the stark attention of policymakers and thinkers, which they might
[Amit Varma]: otherwise have glossed over earlier?
[Guest]: So I think that in the balance between public health and healthcare, there has been learning
[Guest]: in India. I think that when Kelkar and I wrote that chapter on health in the book, it was
[Guest]: reasonably heretical. Almost the entire Indian health policy establishment looked at the
[Guest]: world from the vantage point of being a doctor. The doctor says, I don't care why, but you
[Guest]: got sick and you landed in front of me and I want the adequate resourcing and I want
[Guest]: to get paid well in return for fixing you up. So that was the worldview of health policy
[Guest]: in India, that people get sick and we're not responsible and we don't care why people get
[Guest]: sick and we just want to put more and more money into fixing up the sick people that
[Guest]: come my way. I think COVID-19 has done well in waking up the community that there is a
[Guest]: very big distinction between healthcare versus public health, between prevention and cure.
[Guest]: And prevention is a thousand times better than cure. I could go on and on. One day we
[Guest]: should sit over dinner and I would like to show you the full practical economic and moral
[Guest]: argument that there's really something profoundly important in doing more on prevention. That
[Guest]: argument is further amplified in India, given the fact that the healthcare is reasonably
[Guest]: broken. So, you know, if you were in the UK and the NHS works reasonably well, even there,
[Guest]: I would make a moral and practical argument in favor of prevention and not cure. It's
[Guest]: a thousand times better to have a person not get diabetes or not get COVID-19, as opposed
[Guest]: to trying to send them into a healthcare system. But in India, given that the healthcare system
[Guest]: is pretty terrible, even for people like you and me, even for the richest people in India,
[Guest]: healthcare in India does not work well. It's a really bad healthcare system. Then the importance
[Guest]: of prevention is further amplified. That really the best of all worlds is one where people
[Guest]: don't get sick. So as I read the budget speech yesterday, I was actually a bit delighted
[Guest]: that I saw a lot of effort on questions that I classify as prevention. The only significant
[Guest]: funding surge in a health related thing is on water and sanitation, which I think is
[Guest]: absolutely fantastic. You know, it's much better that people get clean drinking water
[Guest]: and that there is better handling of sewage. I see effort on building the NCDC, which is
[Guest]: a bit like an Indian take on the U.S. CDC, which is absolutely fantastic. We need to
[Guest]: get better on how we think about communicable disease. And we actually do not see significant
[Guest]: increases in the spending on the standard machinery of healthcare. So as I read the
[Guest]: budget speech and some of my colleagues and collaborators worked through the numbers in
[Guest]: the budget, it did feel like there was fresh emphasis on prevention, on public health,
[Guest]: as opposed to healthcare. And these, even these basic words, the distinction that in
[Guest]: health policy, there are two rooms in the house, there's prevention and there's cure,
[Guest]: but there's public health and there is healthcare. These things are not widely known in India.
[Guest]: And I feel this last one year has generated fresh thinking and questioning in the minds
[Guest]: of many people. And I think years from now, we might well call this an important year
[Guest]: in getting our heads in the right place.
[Amit Varma]: Wow. And just to clarify for the listeners, the sort of difference between public health
[Amit Varma]: and healthcare, I'll go back to an analogy that I think you had made. I forget on what
[Amit Varma]: fora it is, maybe you were replying to someone on one of your rare visits to Twitter, but
[Amit Varma]: it was essentially that, you know, if it comes to the problem of malaria, then you think
[Amit Varma]: of public health as doing public fogging so that mosquitoes don't occur in the first place.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas healthcare would be, you know, the doctor treating the patient who's already
[Amit Varma]: got malaria. And your point was that, you know, taking care of the public health, just
[Amit Varma]: making sure the mosquitoes aren't there in the first place, so nobody gets malaria is
[Amit Varma]: the way to go. Except one would imagine that why is a politician incentivized to do that?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, whatever good comes out of it is essentially unseen. So it's interesting
[Amit Varma]: that you point out that, you know, in this budget, they are paying attention to it. And
[Amit Varma]: I guess in the case of COVID, that would mean when you talk about prevention, one is of
[Amit Varma]: course, a draconian blunt tool of a lockdown. But other similar ways of promoting public
[Amit Varma]: health would be just making sure everybody gets a mask and all of those things, I guess,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: The most important piece which was absent in India is contact tracing. So when you test
[Guest]: positive, a health worker should come sit with you and chat about your last one week.
[Guest]: It needs to be a sophisticated, intelligent conversation. Where were you? What were you
[Guest]: doing? Who were you with? Then identify 10-20 people that you had significant exposure with,
[Guest]: and then go meet each of those people, test each of those people. And that's how you keep
[Guest]: the chains going. That's called contact tracing. And it is completely absent in India.
[Amit Varma]: You know, that's good in theory, but it strikes me that, and I'm of course a cynic of straight
[Amit Varma]: capacity, but it just strikes me that given the scale, given how fast things were spreading,
[Amit Varma]: that there was simply no state capacity to do that anyway, you know.
[Guest]: Sure. I agree with you that we did not have that state capacity in India. But if you ask
[Guest]: me, what do you need by way of health policy? This is what you need. And, you know, should
[Guest]: we spend the next 20 years figuring out how to do this? Because there will be other pandemics
[Guest]: in the future? I feel yes. And this is not an Arogya Setu problem. So once again, the
[Guest]: technological solutionism got us in the exactly wrong place. I feel that for many policy makers,
[Guest]: it was convenient and comfortable to say, yeah, I've covered that because we've got
[Guest]: this Arogya Setu thing. And this is something that's happening very often in the Indian
[Guest]: public policy landscape, that we tend to think of technology as the main solution, whereas
[Guest]: technology is a small part of complex organization problems, of complex public ad problems.
[Guest]: If you think of any private business and you think of doing a business process re-engineering,
[Guest]: 99% of the problem in business process re-engineering is thinking about the organization, is dealing
[Guest]: with internal political battles of changing the organization structure and getting people
[Guest]: to go along with a new process design. And 1% of the problem is some technology. So yeah,
[Guest]: technology is important, but it's really a tiny part of the problem. And when we push
[Guest]: a technology first approach, we tend to cut corners on the really important and really
[Guest]: difficult things in India, which is the public administration, the management, the organization
[Guest]: design, the changing the processes of government.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, would it be the case that for whoever is in charge of doing things, a politician
[Amit Varma]: or the bureaucrats concerned or whatever, it comes to a point of not just doing something,
[Amit Varma]: but in a very complex landscape of being able to show that, yes, we are on it, we are doing
[Amit Varma]: something. And in those senses, you know, Arogya Setu is like a very visible thing that
[Amit Varma]: we are on it, we are getting technology to work for us, whereas going the hard yards
[Amit Varma]: of building that kind of intricate state capacity where you have, where you train people to
[Amit Varma]: actually, you know, ask the right questions and begin that kind of contract tracing, that
[Amit Varma]: seems like an enormously huge task to do so.
[Guest]: So then it turns to what are the, so public choice theory shows us that every politician,
[Guest]: every official is maximizing for themselves. And if we live in a country with low standards
[Guest]: of public discourse, and if rolling out an Arogya Setu suffices to claim that I did a
[Guest]: good job, then yeah, that's all that they will do.
[Guest]: Whereas to the extent that the politicians and officials are held accountable for the
[Guest]: actual spread of COVID-19 in the country, then that could change things. So, you know,
[Guest]: India has some of the highest seroprevalence rates in the world, which shows that basically
[Guest]: the disease just ran, nevermind the lockdowns, nevermind the Arogya Setu, the disease just
[Guest]: ran free in India more than essentially anywhere else in the world. And to the extent that
[Guest]: the people will hold government officials and politicians accountable for that environment
[Guest]: of the spread of the disease, then it will generate incentives for the politicians and
[Guest]: officials to behave differently.
[Amit Varma]: My sort of brief thought on that is that one, there is a very sort of complex decision-making
[Amit Varma]: landscape where pretty much no matter what you do, whether you have a lockdown or don't
[Amit Varma]: have a lockdown or to what extent you have one, you know, the seen effects are pretty
[Amit Varma]: bad, which is the lives that are lost or the damage done to the economy. The unseen effects,
[Amit Varma]: which is the lives that would have been lost in the counterfactual are kind of invisible.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like a very difficult choice to make. You're going to get hammered no matter what
[Amit Varma]: you do and perhaps unfairly hammered if you took something close to an optimal decision.
[Amit Varma]: And the other aspect of what I see in India today when you talk about accountability is
[Amit Varma]: that rather than see citizens in search of holding the government accountable, which
[Amit Varma]: is very hard, especially in such a complex scenario where not everybody or not anybody
[Amit Varma]: perhaps can really figure out what the counterfactuals would have looked like, there is also the
[Amit Varma]: tendency in India of picking your tribe and then just going with, you know, whatever your
[Amit Varma]: tribe does is good. Whatever the other tribe does is bad by default. And, you know, we'll
[Amit Varma]: talk a little bit about the farm bills later on in this episode. And it seems to me that
[Amit Varma]: that's also happened with the farm bills in the sense that those who've picked one tribe
[Amit Varma]: is that the Modi government can do no good. And those who pick the other tribe is that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it doesn't matter what the means of pushing this through or whatever, the Modi
[Amit Varma]: government can do only good. So it seems to me that a lot of, and perhaps these are the
[Amit Varma]: vocal minorities, which appear to be like this, and the silent majority hasn't actually
[Amit Varma]: picked a tribe and is open to these questions, and so on. But, you know, because of these
[Amit Varma]: sort of dual problems, one is just the epistemic problem of figuring out whether this action
[Amit Varma]: was right or wrong, because we cannot know the counterfactual and the tribal instinct.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not so, I mean, holding governments accountable, then just sounds very nice in theory, but
[Guest]: I mean, does it really happen?
[Guest]: Our only hope in hell as a society is the idea that there will be a republic where there
[Guest]: will be checks and balances, where governments will be held accountable, and then we will
[Guest]: get performance. Because if that breaks down, then you know, we're toast, there will be
[Guest]: no future of any prosperity and freedom and creativity. If we don't get there. I totally
[Guest]: agree with what you're saying that tribalism and the screaming of the electronic age has
[Guest]: replaced rational thinking. And for all of us, it seems to me that this is really a big
[Guest]: aspect of what we should be up to in life, which is to step away from the screaming and
[Guest]: the mudslinging and the just sheer ugliness of the electronic age and create safe spaces
[Guest]: for careful, thorough, sensible conversation. I mean, it seems like an unreal ask, but it
[Guest]: is the need of the age that this is what all of us need. And we need to do less screaming
[Guest]: and less mudslinging and just be quiet and be thorough, work harder, think harder. The
[Guest]: world is a complicated place and we need more knowledge, not less.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and I think there is a constituency for that. And it's much larger than we think.
[Amit Varma]: It's just very silent. So in all the Twitter shouting, you don't really notice it. But
[Amit Varma]: I think I see some of it in, you know, the people who listen to my podcast, and I'm sure
[Amit Varma]: the people who read your writing and there are people who are constantly searching for
[Amit Varma]: that kind of insight. Now let's, as this is a show which takes many digressions, let's
[Amit Varma]: take a quick digression. You mentioned
[Guest]: I just want to say that you remember when we first started recording podcasts, it took
[Guest]: me two whole podcast episodes to settle down and relax and talk to you because I was just
[Guest]: so convinced I had, I was making assumptions that you're looking for snappy soundbites.
[Guest]: And it took me a long time to get comfortable that no, you're not actually looking for snappy
[Guest]: soundbites and that on this podcast platform, we have an audience that is interested in,
[Guest]: you know, comfortable, reasonable, sane, quiet conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. And that's honestly, it's not that it took you time to figure that out.
[Amit Varma]: It took me time to figure it out and took like many, many tens of episodes to sort of
[Amit Varma]: find this groove and realize that a lot of people crave sort of nuanced conversations.
[Amit Varma]: But to stop patting myself on the back for a moment, I remember, you know, you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: the budget. And I remember last year at around when the budget came out, you know, you, me
[Amit Varma]: and Vivek called it an episode and I think you were in Mumbai only for a day and those
[Amit Varma]: were pre-COVID times when we were recording in physical studios.
[Amit Varma]: So I remember, you know, because you were in and out of Mumbai, I had the notice of
[Amit Varma]: a day to organize a studio for our recording. My regular studio was booked out and I, you
[Amit Varma]: know, opened, I guess the internet version of the Yellow Pages. I just went to Google
[Amit Varma]: and I did search for recording studio Mumbai and the 23rd studio I called happened to have
[Amit Varma]: a slot available. And we went to this random place, recorded, paid cash, got out. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and I was thinking, what an amazing world that you can do something like this.
[Amit Varma]: And before this recording, you mentioned what an amazing world that we can do something
[Amit Varma]: like this, where, you know, we can remotely record with reasonably good technology and
[Amit Varma]: from entirely kind of different places. So we're not really very far. I'm in Andheri,
[Amit Varma]: you're in Karjat right now, I believe, but in these COVID times, that's a universal way.
[Amit Varma]: So let me quickly ask for, you know, your sort of one minute recap of the budget, because
[Amit Varma]: I won't actually be doing a budget special episode, but you mentioned that one aspect
[Amit Varma]: of it that you liked is the focus on public health as opposed to health care in terms
[Amit Varma]: of prevention, water, sanitation, all of those. But what are your broad sort of takeaways
[Guest]: without getting into details?
[Guest]: I'm delighted that the words privatizing PSU Bank has been used for the first time in India's
[Guest]: history. Words matter. You break through these holy cows, it has consequences. So I'm delighted
[Guest]: that that has happened. I'm also delighted about removing the FDI cap in insurance. I
[Guest]: am not that excited about the extent to which these things are really the choke point in
[Guest]: India's journey today, but they have come to become symbols of something and it's good
[Guest]: to break through them. So in these respects, I was really happy at what I saw in the budget.
[Guest]: I'm reasonably worried about what we are seeing on financial economic policy. We're seeing
[Guest]: a whole bunch of 1970s and 1980s thinking. They want to set up a development finance
[Guest]: institution. They want to set up a bad bank. They want to set up some government organization
[Guest]: that will be the market maker for corporate bonds. This is not how it's done. This is
[Guest]: not how it will work. And we have quite a financial crisis on our hands and this is
[Guest]: not going to get fixed. I was delighted at the improvements in the transparency and the
[Guest]: truthfulness of the budget statements that partly last year and partly this year, they've
[Guest]: really done it. They have cleaned out the reporting. So for years and years, there was
[Guest]: all kinds of obfuscation, bordering on prevarication that was happening in the financial statements
[Guest]: being released by the government. This year, it feels like we're done. They've put everything
[Guest]: on the table and it is being recorded and reported truthfully. Some people are jumping
[Guest]: about the double quotes, large fiscal deficit. No, it's not a large fiscal deficit. It's
[Guest]: just being reported. All that's changed is the reporting. It was there. It was lurking
[Guest]: in a subclinical way for many years and we were just not talking about it as honestly
[Guest]: and openly. So I felt some things are in a good direction. Some things are not. And the
[Guest]: really, really big question, the trillion dollar question is, what will it take to change
[Guest]: the investment climate in India to get the private sector back to buoyancy and optimism?
[Guest]: And I think that turns on some of these central planning problems and rule of law problems.
[Guest]: And I did not see a whole lot of that in the budget speech.
[Amit Varma]: So, tell me another thing to continue down this digressive path that we look to the government
[Amit Varma]: for reforms. We look to the budget to see what has been done, what has not been done
[Amit Varma]: and are we moving ahead and all of that. But the thing is that in many of these cases,
[Amit Varma]: politicians don't have deep knowledge of all of this and very often even bureaucrats are
[Amit Varma]: generalists and kind of don't. So there is in the background, a community of experts
[Amit Varma]: and elite influencers and economists and so on who work for years to kind of make things
[Amit Varma]: happen behind the scenes till something that they've been talking about, you know, 20 years
[Amit Varma]: ago finally comes into some bill or becomes a reform somewhere. And it's kind of like
[Amit Varma]: a very silent effort. There's not much self-interest involved because these are not like industry
[Amit Varma]: lobbies lobbying for a particular measure that will help them. Instead, it's just an
[Amit Varma]: economist who doesn't directly benefit saying, hey, this is what the country needs. And a
[Amit Varma]: lot of that kind of happens behind the scenes and you have yourself, you know, as part of
[Amit Varma]: the finance ministry and the NIPFP and all of that sort of been a part of this group
[Amit Varma]: of influencers trying to push change through and all of that. So one is kind of tell me
[Amit Varma]: a little bit about this process about, you know, what are your incentives at play or
[Amit Varma]: the incentives of all of these people who try to bring about change in this manner and
[Amit Varma]: how does the process flow and how do you get people to listen to you? So there is a very
[Guest]: well-defined process flow. In every field, you start at facts, you start at statistics.
[Guest]: Okay. So the first puzzle in every field is that we in India need to establish some mechanisms
[Guest]: of gathering data and systematizing the capture of data so that year after year after year,
[Guest]: some good quality facts, micro data sets are being created. Then step two, you need a research
[Guest]: community that will work on this data and that research community needs to be deeply
[Guest]: rooted in India. So there is one problem of trying to get some papers through into journals
[Guest]: abroad versus there's a different problem of trying to look at India, understand problems
[Guest]: and contribute to knowledge here in India. So the extent to which many academics have
[Guest]: become publish and perish looking at journals abroad and the extent to which we seem to
[Guest]: award prestige in return to journals abroad is a bit of an impediment and we need to find
[Guest]: ways to create a deeply grounded local community, a domestic community that is here, that has
[Guest]: an intuition into what are the questions and that chips away writing a literature on what
[Guest]: is going on so that maybe we have a scientific and an analytical understanding and 20 human
[Guest]: beings who embody that knowledge. The 20 human beings is as important as the 50 papers and
[Guest]: blog articles that make up that knowledge. Then the next step is a creative process of
[Guest]: inventing policy proposals. So there's a creative act of thinking that article 301 of the constitution
[Guest]: is an opens up possibilities for a national market in agriculture and that it is possible
[Guest]: for the union, for the parliament to legislate on this space. And this kind of creative thinking
[Guest]: needs to take place and there need to be some people who will engage in this kind of creative
[Guest]: thinking. For example, what I just said to you about contact tracing. Okay. It is a creative
[Guest]: act of looking around this landscape and understanding that Arogya Setu is not an answer and that
[Guest]: there is a complex public administration problem of how do you build contact tracing. And there
[Guest]: is a real problem in this creative step because the academic journals do not publish such
[Guest]: articles. So there is zero career incentive for anybody to do this kind of creativity
[Guest]: to invent these things. So they come out as working papers and blog articles and they
[Guest]: don't go into normal academic keeping score and getting jobs and getting promotions and
[Guest]: so on. So that's a creative stage of inventing, competing, diverse policy proposals. And of
[Guest]: course, many policy proposals tend to bubble out of the country itself. So industrialists
[Guest]: and associations and various people, individuals, a person writing an opinion piece in a newspaper.
[Guest]: Everybody dreams and comes up with creative proposals that why don't we solve this problem
[Guest]: in X fashion. Then comes a great process of public debate where there are different rival
[Guest]: solutions and they need to fight it out in the public domain, trying to persuade more
[Guest]: people that, you know, this is the right idea and that is not the right idea. And in this,
[Guest]: one of the more harmful things in India has been the extent to which incumbent government
[Guest]: organizations have a disproportionate say in chilling this debate. So generally, if
[Guest]: you are a reporter covering a beat, then you rely on access to the existing power structure
[Guest]: and then it becomes impossible to write articles that question that power structure. So you
[Guest]: get a whole bunch of newspaper stories that are supportive of the status quo. There's
[Guest]: a very strong status quo bias in the conventional media system where it's difficult to express
[Guest]: views that suggest that there's something going wrong with the mainstream government
[Guest]: machinery. So we get a whole lot of praise in India. We get self praise that X agency
[Guest]: has done a great job. You know, 90% of the coverage that you get is that X agency has
[Guest]: done a great job. You don't actually get a good deal of critical thinking. There is a
[Guest]: severe undersupply of criticism that we're not doing enough in terms of fostering that
[Guest]: safety, that vibrant environment of criticism. Then the story turns to decision processes
[Guest]: inside government. In my years in the Ministry of Finance, 2001 to 2005, it was an extremely
[Guest]: intellectual environment where there would be these kinds of debates all the time where
[Guest]: various papers and newspaper articles and opinion pieces and seminars and conferences
[Guest]: would keep bubbling these debates and there would be a conversation going on in the Ministry
[Guest]: of Finance all the time that should we be doing X or should we be doing Y. Similarly,
[Guest]: there used to be a very simple accountability system. I have worked with three different
[Guest]: finance ministers. I joined the Ministry of Finance when Yashwant Sinha was a minister.
[Guest]: I stayed with Yashwant Singh. I stayed with P. J. Dambaram and I left in 2005. All the
[Guest]: three ministers would take an opinion piece from a newspaper which is criticizing the
[Guest]: government and send it down to the concerned officer and say, please speak. So the guy
[Guest]: handling that portfolio would have to come back to the minister and justify himself or
[Guest]: herself against the criticism that has come out in the newspaper. I thought that was absolutely
[Guest]: fantastic. It was a way of bringing that external discourse inside the organization. Similarly,
[Guest]: I remember Vijay Kelkar used to have a discipline in that period that he would read about 20
[Guest]: opinion pieces in the newspapers every morning and he would pick two. And for two of those
[Guest]: pieces, he would pick up the phone and talk to the author. So Kelkar knows everybody.
[Guest]: So Kelkar would pick up the phone and talk to the authors and just go further. What were
[Guest]: you thinking? What were you writing? What is your thinking on this adjacent problem
[Guest]: and get a deeper sense. So for him, it was a very good investment that he would wake
[Guest]: up in the morning, read all the opinion pieces of all the newspapers, follow up for one hour
[Guest]: with two phone calls. And that's the way you keep the mind buzzing. It's important to listen
[Guest]: to other people and particularly the people that don't agree, particularly the people
[Guest]: that are criticizing the establishment, that are criticizing the government. And then in
[Guest]: many important moments, the way the Indian public policy process works is that there
[Guest]: is an expert committee. So it is easy to deride the expert committee process. And there is
[Guest]: a lot of rubbish in the expert committee process. But as Ishar Aluwalia used to say, nothing
[Guest]: ever got done by putting it in an expert committee report, but nothing ever got done without
[Guest]: it being in 10 expert committee reports. So the expert committee process is a way of sifting
[Guest]: through the landscape and, you know, keeping out the really kooky, nonsensical stuff and
[Guest]: bringing about a judgment about what is the range of plausible alternatives of pretty
[Guest]: much defining the Overton window, which then goes as the raw material to the real decision
[Guest]: makers who are the politicians and the officials. And then some decisions get made and then
[Guest]: some laws have to be drafted. That's a real weak link in India. There is, you know, very,
[Guest]: very small number of people in India who have the expertise on how to draft laws correctly.
[Guest]: Almost all law students in India don't know how to draft laws. And many, many laws get
[Guest]: drafted reasonably badly. And finally, after a law is drafted, you need to create the public
[Guest]: administration, the state capacity, the organizations that will enforce these laws in a reasonably
[Guest]: effective way so that it doesn't just collapse into some authoritarian oppression where some
[Guest]: officials hold arbitrary power over individuals. So this is the pipeline. Data, research, creative
[Guest]: policy proposals, public debate, government, internal discussions, government committee
[Guest]: process, government decisions, drafting of laws, building organizations that are the
[Guest]: state capacity that enforce laws. This is the stylized track that we have to walk upon.
[Guest]: A field works well when all these pieces work reasonably well. So in the 90s and the 2000s,
[Guest]: we made progress in finance in India because there was a community of about 50 to 100 people
[Guest]: who were the self-appointed owners of financial economic policy in India. And they were all
[Guest]: over this process. So all the pieces of this pipeline were nurtured and built and stoked.
[Guest]: And that is how we got a bunch of things done in that period. And a field which does not
[Guest]: have this kind of community and which has appalling weaknesses in any one or two elements
[Guest]: of the pipeline is a field where we flounder and fail.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me, you know, you mentioned how something that is kooky and nonsensical,
[Amit Varma]: you know, will not get through the expert committee process. And I immediately thought
[Amit Varma]: of demonetization, which, of course, obviously went through no expert committee process.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, it would never have survived. And equally, it seems to me that the farm bills
[Amit Varma]: do seem to have come out of that kind of long process because these ideas have been put
[Amit Varma]: forward and debated and discussed for donkey's years. In fact, these very proposals have
[Amit Varma]: been on the manifestos of different political parties, like the Congress and the armed party
[Amit Varma]: at different points in time. So would it then be correct to say that these reforms just
[Amit Varma]: happen to have bubbled to the surface now and actually taken concrete shape, but they've
[Amit Varma]: been more than a couple of decades in the making, right?
[Guest]: In my opinion, the thoroughness of the upstream process that... So first, just so that everybody
[Guest]: is clear where I stand. Fundamentally, I agree with the three farm bills. Okay. I have only
[Guest]: small modifications that I would suggest to the farm bill. So just to put my biases on
[Guest]: the table that I think that they are on the right track. 90%, 95%, they're on the right
[Guest]: track. In my opinion, the process that led up to them was not sufficiently thorough.
[Guest]: And there was an element of surprise and pushback that came because not enough had been done
[Guest]: in terms of the public debate and the committee process and 200 seminars and conferences all
[Guest]: over the country talking about these things, a draft law being out in public domain for
[Guest]: several years, things like that. So I feel that the thoroughness of the process also
[Guest]: helps in terms of the politics, because then there are no real surprises. You kind of know
[Guest]: this is coming. It's been there for a long time. Several committee reports work on it.
[Guest]: Each committee report triggers 100 events where there are seminars, conferences, podcast
[Guest]: episodes, and so on, on every single important government committee report. And that's a
[Guest]: part of how we get used to the idea. So I said the government committee process shapes
[Guest]: the Overton window. And the surprise should happen in a government committee report, not
[Guest]: in the doing. Because that's the point at which it's not as painful for a person that
[Guest]: something comes out of the blue. So I think government committees are the right soft place
[Guest]: that here's a new idea, which has been considered kooky all these years. And we are now legitimizing
[Guest]: it. We are mainstreaming it. It's in the government committee process. So I have seen and I have
[Guest]: written many documents which are inside the government file process. And it is almost
[Guest]: mandatory for the file process to say inside the file that here's a problem. You need to
[Guest]: demonstrate that it's a problem. Then you say, we've had these six committees which
[Guest]: have written on this in the past. Then you put a quotation, quotation, quotation, quotation
[Guest]: from six different government committees. So you say, look, we worked this to death.
[Guest]: We've gone through the normal, thorough, systematic, hardworking government committee process. And
[Guest]: there is a fair consensus between these diverse committees on what it is that is to be done.
[Guest]: And so now we're ready to take the next step that it is time to draft a law. It is time
[Guest]: to enact this law. So that catechism is the machinery of how a green sheet file ought
[Guest]: to work. And the fact that it was out there in several committee reports, ideally a draft
[Guest]: law was out there, helps to introduce the idea to everybody and reduce the surprise.
[Guest]: And in my opinion, in the case of the three farm bills, which I agree with substantively,
[Guest]: not enough was done in terms of these early stages of the pipeline. I think we've been
[Guest]: cutting corners on the discussion and debate parts of the policy pipeline. The discussion
[Guest]: and debate parts are partly valuable because discussion and debate improves the answer.
[Guest]: They're also valuable in a political sense in that they sensitize the broader community
[Guest]: for what is coming.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great point. And we're going to take a short break after which we'll, you know,
[Amit Varma]: just get down to the subject of agriculture and the reforms that you would like to see
[Amit Varma]: happen and these farm bills and our historical problems and all of that. But before we go
[Amit Varma]: to the break, sort of a quick question on the earlier subject of healthcare and the
[Amit Varma]: pandemic that when you look at the government's approach towards the pandemic in India, and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, right now it's not over, we still have to get a lot of the vaccination done
[Amit Varma]: and all of those things to happen. What do you think are the faults in the framework
[Amit Varma]: through which the government approaches this? Like one obvious fault that seems to me is
[Amit Varma]: to have this sort of central planning conceit of the government will roll the vaccine out
[Amit Varma]: and private participation is not really required, we'll control everything. Whereas I think
[Amit Varma]: what instinctively strikes me as more reasonable is that yes, the government should put all
[Amit Varma]: its effort in spreading everything out, but at the same time, allow the private sector
[Amit Varma]: also to make it available, have multiple pipelines going. So, you know, if somebody wants to
[Amit Varma]: pay a premium for it and sort of all that, that option should be kind of open to them.
[Amit Varma]: So that seems to me to be one kind of point of dogma, which is getting in the way. But
[Amit Varma]: broadly speaking, what are the top level two or three changes in attitude that you would
[Amit Varma]: like to see?
[Guest]: So the first I've already mentioned, which is prevention versus cure. I feel it is a
[Guest]: moral imperative and it is the sane, rational thing to do to really put a high focus on
[Guest]: prevention. And when you pause to think about what shapes prevention, it's a fundamental
[Guest]: fact that most of it is not the work of doctors, is not the work of Ministry of Health. So
[Guest]: as an example, the giant health crises of India are owing to air quality, owing to water
[Guest]: and sanitation, owing to road safety. Okay. These kinds of things are sitting outside
[Guest]: a Ministry of Health. Consider a problem like natural disasters. We in India are building
[Guest]: an urban environment, which is extremely unsafe and is ready for floods and earthquakes to
[Guest]: generate devastating consequences for the health and the lives of people. So you need
[Guest]: to go after disaster risk resilience, which is not seen as a Ministry of Health activity.
[Guest]: Consider the food system, that how to increase the nutritive quality of food, how to reduce
[Guest]: the role of wheat and rice in our diet. This is food system transformation. And again,
[Guest]: it is not inside the Ministry of Health. So conceptually, I feel that if you take prevention
[Guest]: seriously, then there is a cross-cutting health agenda that influences many, many elements
[Guest]: of government. It is a Ministry of Environment and Agriculture that will impact on air quality.
[Guest]: It is a Ministry of Agriculture that will reshape the food system. It is the Ministry
[Guest]: of Roads that will build better road safety. It is the water and the sanitation crew that
[Guest]: will improve the water system. It is a whole complicated problem about urban planning and
[Guest]: the built environment that will generate disaster risk resilience and so on. So it seems to
[Guest]: me that we need a new kind of collaboration muscle where we are able to bring an across-the-government
[Guest]: approach to putting health policy into the working of many, many ministries. And to continue
[Guest]: on where we were a moment ago, as you know, I work in many, many fields, but I have been
[Guest]: reasonably worried about the quality and the capabilities of the health policy community
[Guest]: in India. We really don't have a community that is commensurate with the problems of
[Guest]: health policy. So it's not entirely accidental that health policy is one of the weakest areas
[Guest]: in India in terms of what the Indian state is doing. And it has to do with the kind of
[Guest]: capabilities of this community. It also has to do with the domination of doctors. So just
[Guest]: because a person is a great doctor and is definitely my go-to person when I get tuberculosis,
[Guest]: that doesn't mean that this person is the right person to think about health policy,
[Guest]: to think about public health. That's a different capability altogether. And we have just not
[Guest]: succeeded in laying the foundations of those 50 key people of the right data sets of the
[Guest]: researchers.
[Guest]: So on the research side, we don't get much useful health in terms of the research papers
[Guest]: that are written because partly a lot of the economists are pursuing the overseas development
[Guest]: economics journals who are really fundamentally cut off from India, public administration,
[Guest]: public policy. And I mean, there is a game of publishing in those journals that is rather
[Guest]: lacking in its ability to illuminate the problems of public policy in India where the rubber
[Guest]: hits the road.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And it seems to me to be a sort of a problem of like you need a community of problem
[Amit Varma]: solvers, which would include economists. But then you look at the incentives for economists
[Amit Varma]: for many of these, it is to become part of this whole circus of, you know, publishing
[Amit Varma]: in journals abroad and rising up the academic ladder there and so on and so forth. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what can kind of change that? Because what we don't really see so much of is economists
[Amit Varma]: here really aspiring to be public intellectuals and hoping to make change. What are the incentives
[Amit Varma]: for those who ignore that particular sort of path and choose to sort of make a change
[Amit Varma]: here? Like you came back to India at one point and you kind of gave up that path and you
[Amit Varma]: came back to this path. And we've, of course, discussed this in a past episode. But briefly,
[Amit Varma]: you know, is that something that worries you that too many people who could make a difference
[Amit Varma]: drift away because their incentives are different? And therefore, there is a lack of intellectual
[Amit Varma]: capacity working on these problems?
[Guest]: There is a real incentives problem. So health policy is currently designed by doctors and
[Guest]: it is healthcare focused and it tends to think that there is a government and the government
[Guest]: is like one big PSU. They own a lot of hospitals and they want to run those hospitals. And
[Guest]: there's really very little health policy going beyond that. Governments tend to think that
[Guest]: the health is the job of the Ministry of Health. So, you know, we're stuck because a Ministry
[Guest]: of Health tends to be doctor dominated. You may have heard me often say that one of the
[Guest]: least effective pathways to thinking about public policy in India is to ask an IIT engineer
[Guest]: how to solve the problem. Well, in similar fashion, one of the least effective ways to
[Guest]: find solutions in health policy is to ask a doctor how to make progress on health policy.
[Guest]: And one pathway to change things would have been intellectual leadership at the level
[Guest]: of a Ministry of Finance and a Prime Minister, which who are able to see things in a more
[Guest]: intellectual way and look at the world in a different way compared to how a Ministry
[Guest]: of Health sees it. Another element of the change will be philanthropy and philanthropic
[Guest]: capital. In my opinion, so far, the impact and usefulness of philanthropy in India has
[Guest]: been limited, partly because most philanthropy tends to think about running programs and
[Guest]: not thinking about policy. So people get satisfied when they give lunches to 1000 kids, but not
[Guest]: in getting research done and getting the landscape of ideas to change. So I think that there's
[Guest]: a very basic kind of philanthropy that tends to rule the roost, which is nice. It makes
[Guest]: you feel good. But frankly, it is one upon 1000 of the impact that can be obtained by
[Guest]: changing the landscape of ideas and by changing the way we think about these things. Another
[Guest]: problem is that a lot of philanthropists build organizations and the employees of those organizations
[Guest]: crave government engagement. They are judged by their ability to influence public policy
[Guest]: on a day-to-day basis in the extent to which they are friends with joint secretaries and
[Guest]: secretaries of government. And in the extreme, many of philanthropy in India is an extended
[Guest]: arm of the Indian state, because the Indian state gets a very large say on how the philanthropic
[Guest]: capital is being deployed and allocated. And in my opinion, that's a shame because it could
[Guest]: be done so much better.
[Amit Varma]: No, it is a shame. In fact, in the last episode I did with Ruben Mascarenas, he was talking
[Amit Varma]: about how when they reached out to companies for the CSR funds, they were told by companies
[Amit Varma]: that they had all been told to give the CSR funds to the PMKs fund, which, of course,
[Amit Varma]: is an astronomical black hole, which is a bit of a pity. But you know, lots to unpack
[Amit Varma]: here and maybe one day we can do a separate episode on all of this because it seems really
[Amit Varma]: fascinating. But for the moment, let's take a quick commercial break and then we can start
[Amit Varma]: talking about agriculture.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games. Well, if you want
[Amit Varma]: to be surrounded by beauty and you love fine art, I have a win-win proposition for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to IndianColors.com. Indian Colors licenses images of fine art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best contemporary artists in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote
[Amit Varma]: bags, pouches and home decor items. You get to surround yourself with the finest modern
[Amit Varma]: Indian art at affordable prices and artists get royalties for every product you buy. Win-win
[Amit Varma]: game. The Indian Colors new range is in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for
[Amit Varma]: women and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy Samanta,
[Amit Varma]: Manisha Ghera Baswadi, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra and Jaideep Mehrotra. Stay home but
[Amit Varma]: dress smart. And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not. You can
[Amit Varma]: show them you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian Colors. Corporate
[Amit Varma]: gifting is also available. So head on over to IndianColors.com. There's colors with an
[Amit Varma]: OU and make art a part of your life. And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code unseen. That's
[Amit Varma]: right. Unseen for 15% off at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. You know, I've had episodes on why there are no futures markets and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, how because there is no corporatization, there's no chance for scale. Farmers are forced
[Amit Varma]: to be entrepreneurs besides their core competency of farming, which is really unfair. It's just
[Amit Varma]: an entire kind of litany of things. Now, in your recent writing, including articles that
[Amit Varma]: are linked from the show notes, you've kind of narrowed down a few basic areas in which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you think that we can reform immediately and the farm bills tackle one of them, but
[Amit Varma]: not all of them. So kind of take me through your thinking of this from, you know, starting
[Amit Varma]: again at the meta level from the first principles of what is wrong and then how those can be
[Amit Varma]: fixed and what the benefit to us will be.
[Guest]: So it's very useful to think about the decisions that are made in the path to the production
[Guest]: of food. Okay, so economics is about decisions. And so the first question we should ask is,
[Guest]: what are the decisions? And there are actually exactly three decisions that are made in the
[Guest]: field of agriculture. The first decision is what to sow. Okay, so you have some land and
[Guest]: do you put wheat or do you put rice or do you put potatoes or whatever? It's the first
[Guest]: decision. So it's a very important decision. And we need to think about how that decision
[Guest]: happens. The second decision is how much money to spend on putting inputs into the period
[Guest]: in which the crops are growing. So how much money do you put for fertilizers, for high
[Guest]: yielding varieties and so on, purchase of water. And the third decision is that of storage,
[Guest]: that some economic agents in the country choose to store goods. It could be that the farmer
[Guest]: has some kutcha storage right there where he has harvested the crop, or it could be
[Guest]: a more professional environment where somebody else buys goods on the spot market, puts them
[Guest]: in a warehouse and carries them into a future date. Okay, so that's how we transport agricultural
[Guest]: goods through time. We put them into storage. These are the three fundamental decisions
[Guest]: that are made. What to sow, how much to put as inputs and what to store, when to store.
[Guest]: So we should think of all the factors that influence and shape these decisions. How can
[Guest]: you create a good environment where rational thinking individuals make better decisions
[Guest]: on what to sow? How can you create a better environment where inputs are chosen in a rational
[Guest]: way that generates the correct outcomes? And how can you produce more rational decisions
[Guest]: about storage? This is a nice x-ray that helps you to understand what is going wrong in agriculture.
[Guest]: So everything that is going wrong in agriculture is about state-induced distortions in these
[Guest]: three decisions, that the government is messing with the decision of what to sow, is messing
[Guest]: with the inputs decision, is messing with the storage decision. And these three classes
[Guest]: of difficulties are coming together and generating a bad life for the agriculturists of India.
[Guest]: That's a useful, simple way to think about the whole thing.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, let's, for example, talk about the decision of what to sow. Now, typically,
[Amit Varma]: what happens is if you look at a marketplace where there is demand and there is supply,
[Amit Varma]: how would an agriculturalist decide what to sow? He would do it on the basis of prices.
[Amit Varma]: Like the best way for you to get information about what do people need, what do people
[Amit Varma]: value is to look at the prices and say that, okay, from the prices it appears that there
[Amit Varma]: is a shortage in this particular thing, in commodity X, and therefore, I will sow more
[Amit Varma]: of commodity X and fulfil that. And obviously, this also leads to what Paul Samuelson called
[Amit Varma]: the cobweb effect, which I'll come to later. But broadly, this is how prices would determine
[Amit Varma]:  and this is how prices determine everything elsewhere. Like, you know, my entire housing
[Amit Varma]: society feeds itself every morning, not because some central planner sits there and in all
[Amit Varma]: his wisdom decides what each person will want. But because, you know, we have our routines
[Amit Varma]: of what we buy and all of that, and they affect the prices every day. And similarly, producers
[Amit Varma]: produce according to that and all of that. One doesn't, I think, really need to describe
[Amit Varma]: the price system in that way. Now, the distortion comes in when the government says that, look,
[Amit Varma]: I'll give you, for example, like, I'll give you an MSP for, you know, produce Y. And at
[Amit Varma]: which point in time that distorts the signal that is coming from the marketplace, because
[Amit Varma]: now the farmer is incentivized to make produce Y because he's got a guaranteed MSP income
[Amit Varma]: at the end of it, and therefore ignore produce X, which is what the people might also want.
[Amit Varma]: And where this can get particularly sort of pernicious is when, for example, Punjab's
[Amit Varma]: involvement with rice. Number one, there is, of course, you know, they have these MSP incentives
[Amit Varma]: to make rice and sell rice. Number two, you know, rice is a water intensive product. Punjab
[Amit Varma]: is slightly on the arid side, they should not be making rice to begin with. But they
[Amit Varma]: do that because you introduced another distortion by giving them free electricity to farmers.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, they can, you know, dig bore wells and draw out plenty of groundwater to
[Amit Varma]: grow rice with, which leads to a water problem. And I've also had episodes on the water problems
[Amit Varma]: that this leads to. So you have all of these different distortions. And one of the unintended
[Amit Varma]: consequences or unseen effects of all of this of Punjabi farmers growing rice is the air
[Amit Varma]: pollution in Delhi, for example, because then they burn the stubble and the winds carry
[Amit Varma]: it to Delhi and the air pollution there is exacerbated. And you're like, how do we even
[Amit Varma]: solve this massive problem? And as you pointed out earlier, air quality is a public health
[Amit Varma]: issue. So is it then the case that one of the fundamental distortions which really messes
[Amit Varma]: all of this up is sort of MSPs, which are by the way, not the subject of the farm bills,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in spite of what so many people seem to think. The farm bills, I don't think
[Amit Varma]: mention MSPs at all. But, you know, is this a fundamental sort of distortion when it comes
[Amit Varma]: to that first question you raised on what to sow?
[Guest]: MSP is indeed a fundamental distortion. The impact of MSP upon the economy is smaller
[Guest]: than meets the eye, because for a large number of crops at a large number of locations in
[Guest]: India, the administrative machinery for implementing MSP is not there. So actually the damage that
[Guest]: MSP is doing to India is smaller than meets the eye. So for many people, MSP looms large.
[Guest]: It's actually not as big a problem as it is made out to be. As you correctly said, there
[Guest]: is not a hint of MSP in these farm bills. And we'll come to that when we talk more about
[Guest]: the problem of national market. Equally important in the price question, in my opinion, is the
[Guest]: problem of the futures markets. That when in June I'm making a decision on what to do
[Guest]: with my Kharif land, I need to make decisions based on my expectations about what the price
[Guest]: will be in October. And there is no clarity on what the price will be in October. And
[Guest]: the solution basically is once again to use prices as the information system. The price
[Guest]: in October is visible in the futures market. Some people may choose to actually lock in
[Guest]: a sale price using a futures market, but that's just a tiny tip of the iceberg. 99% of the
[Guest]: people just benefit, get a positive externality because they're able to see the price on the
[Guest]: futures market. It gives you the best available estimate. It's not a guarantee unless you
[Guest]: choose to lock in. So it is available as a guarantee if you choose to lock in. If you
[Guest]: choose to not lock in, it's not a guarantee, but it's the best available estimator for
[Guest]: what will be prevailing conditions in October. So putting together supply, demand, global
[Guest]: conditions, everything, the futures price is what people can use as an information system
[Guest]: to make better decisions about what to sell. And one of the many things that the Indian
[Guest]: state does is to damage the ability to get to a sensible commodity futures market.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, demystify this for me. And like, of course I agree with you, but most people
[Amit Varma]: listening to this will be like, you know, futures market sounds like something that
[Amit Varma]: is very sophisticated, which investors with computers and Bloomberg terminals will sit
[Amit Varma]: down and look at. And I've done an episode where I've kind of demystified this ages ago.
[Amit Varma]: I think it was a short 15 minute episode with Karthik Shashidhar, but sort of demystify
[Amit Varma]: this for me. How does it help the practical farmer on the ground? Like, let's say I'm
[Amit Varma]: a farmer and I'm deciding what to sow and I'm making my decisions for the next season
[Amit Varma]: ki yeh banana hai, itna invest karna hai. How do futures markets help me in those practical
[Guest]: terms?
[Guest]: So what is the spot market? There is a market where people are buying and selling cotton
[Guest]: for delivery just now. So on the spot, I'll pay you money, you'll give me the cotton.
[Guest]: What is the futures market? It's where you and I agree on a transaction today, but the
[Guest]: money and the cotton will be exchanged six months out. Okay, that's it. Nothing else
[Guest]: is different. It is exactly the same as doing a transaction, except so we lock in on the
[Guest]: price and quantity, but the actual transaction will be consummated six months from now. Six
[Guest]: months from now, you'll give me the money and I'll give you the cotton. Okay. So there
[Guest]: is a price that is visible in that market because there are many, many people participating
[Guest]: in it.
[Guest]: And that brings me to the decision of what to sow. Imagine that there's a person who's
[Guest]: making a decision about whether I should be sowing tur dal or I should be sowing cotton.
[Guest]: Okay. So I'm signing in June and I'm making the decision about what to sow. And I make
[Guest]: my calculations that I will spend so much money on fertilizer and so much money on buying
[Guest]: the seeds and so on. And what will be my prospective revenue when the goods come out? Answer is
[Guest]: I just glance at the futures price. That's all. It's very simple. It's not complicated.
[Guest]: All over the world, farmers do that. It's not an unreasonable ask that instead of taking
[Guest]: today's spot price of cotton, take the spot price on the date at which your harvest will
[Guest]: be out and you will be selling into the market. It's a very simple and reasonable ask. Okay.
[Guest]: And case two, you may decide that I am so risk averse that I want to remove the risk
[Guest]: that I have about the future price. No problem. Go to the futures market, sell your goods
[Guest]: there. So you've got a locked in price. So these are the choices. At case one, you just
[Guest]: look at the price and you say, look, the price will fluctuate. But standing today, this is
[Guest]: my best estimator. Case two, you say, no, you know, I'm totally risk averse. I don't
[Guest]: want to take any chances. I want to sell my goods today at that locked in price. Sure,
[Guest]: do that. It's called the futures market. So this is the magic of the futures market. And
[Guest]: it is really a very, very important element of any healthy agricultural system.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it does sound magical to me because, you know, if there's a spot market, I can
[Amit Varma]: plan only for today. I know what the price is today. I have no way of figuring out what
[Amit Varma]: the price will be six months from now. Whereas the futures market will give the agriculturalist
[Amit Varma]: that level of comfort that, okay, I can plan now. So it is almost like an MSP, except that
[Amit Varma]: it is not given by the government. There is no element of coercion. And it is also not
[Amit Varma]: giving him a wrong signal like a government MSP would give. Instead, it is a market which
[Amit Varma]: is determining future prices. And therefore, those signals are sort of that much more accurate.
[Amit Varma]: So why are they not allowed? Is it because of this sort of ideological?
[Guest]: They are not allowed, but it's a part of the broader failure on financial markets in India,
[Guest]: that there is a whole array of restrictions, which has damaged the ability of these markets
[Guest]: to do their work. So the markets are actually minuscule and the price discovery is not so
[Guest]: great. And it doesn't work in the way that it is intended to work.
[Amit Varma]: And another sort of point that you've made is that, you know, right now, there are no
[Amit Varma]: sources of stability. Farmers are, of course, forced to also be entrepreneurs. They want
[Amit Varma]: stability and it seems to them that the handout of an MSP is, you know, some kind of stability.
[Amit Varma]: They have some basis on which to plan. But as you've pointed out, that international
[Amit Varma]: trade is a much better source of that, because if your minimum price is going to be the market
[Amit Varma]: price that the world is offering, then that is a better MSP than an MSP that the government
[Amit Varma]: can offer. You know, it gives you the same sense of security. It gives you a much broader
[Amit Varma]: market and therefore better prices for your goods. And obviously, you will only be selling
[Amit Varma]: things there when there is a glut of supply here. So instead of things getting wasted,
[Amit Varma]: you actually have a kind of market for it there. So what is the thought of thinking
[Amit Varma]: on this? Because what one gets to hear from the policy landscape, if like me, you're just
[Amit Varma]: a casual observer and you just peruse the papers once in a while, and once in a while,
[Amit Varma]: you'll see some news about, oh, you know, onion exports have been banned now and oh,
[Amit Varma]: onion exports are back. And it seems to me extremely unpredictable and chaotic and even
[Amit Varma]: moody if one may use that term for the state, where there's no predictability, you know,
[Amit Varma]: farmers can't plan for an export policy and look ahead. And so according to that and equally,
[Amit Varma]: you know, people who might buy our stuff from abroad can't also make long term plans because
[Guest]: everything is so arbit. So in the thinking about international trade, yes, international
[Guest]: trade is a tremendous source of stability, that when there is a harvest in India, which
[Guest]: is a glut, you want to put things on ships and planes and send them out. Okay. And vice
[Guest]: versa, when there's a shortage in India, we want to be able to readily import things from
[Guest]: abroad. In this one very important thing to remember is that we should not think about
[Guest]: the word India will import wheat or India will import cotton, because then that tends
[Guest]: to equate it with the Indian state. Okay, actually, all that we need is for the government
[Guest]: to get out of the way, then private people will do everything. So then private people
[Guest]: have all the right incentives, that private people will be watching the price in Singapore
[Guest]: or in Dubai, and will buy in Singapore, sell in India, buy in India, sell in Singapore,
[Guest]: figure out that, you know, I could actually put tomatoes into planes and ship them out
[Guest]: to Dubai and that I'm able to generate a good profit. So a large number of practical decisions
[Guest]: made by one individual firm, one individual trader at a time, is the right vision that
[Guest]: we should be having. We should not think of the word India, because it completely messes
[Guest]: with our brain. So we start thinking that India will demand 10 million tons of wheat
[Guest]: and the world market may not provide it. Okay. So first of all, there is no, there should
[Guest]: not be an India, a single national body. There should be large numbers of individual decisions
[Guest]: and many, many, many decisions will get made. Some people will choose to hold inventory
[Guest]: in India. Some people will look at the futures market. They will say, Hey, I think there's
[Guest]: a big increase in the price of wheat that is going to happen in the next few months.
[Guest]: Let me import wheat right now and let me store it in India so that I'm ready to sell into
[Guest]: the Indian market day by day, week by week. As the price unfolds, there are big industrial
[Guest]: buyers like ITC, which makes Atta or Britannia, which makes bread and biscuits. They will
[Guest]: constantly have that intelligence of sourcing wheat all over the world, making rational
[Guest]: decisions about when to store, how much to store. And these hundreds of equilibrating
[Guest]: decisions will bring about more stability in the Indian market. So we should think of
[Guest]: the international market as a giant buffer, which protects the Indian market from fluctuations
[Guest]: that either consumers or producers get affected because of the crazy volatility of Indian
[Guest]: prices. And the solution to that is to have a very open environment on international trade.
[Amit Varma]: One of the pieces which you sent me, which I enjoyed reading, has a headline, an agricultural
[Amit Varma]: trade powerhouse, which I'll link from the show notes. And there you make the very interesting
[Amit Varma]: point that, as the headline says, that we can be an agricultural trade powerhouse. And
[Amit Varma]: typically I think a lot of Indians, when they think about the economy, think about how,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we are doing well in services now, almost by default that happened post liberalization
[Amit Varma]: wasn't regulated. But we missed the bus when it came to labor intensive manufacture, where
[Amit Varma]: because we have so much cheap labor, we could actually like China and maybe in the later
[Amit Varma]: day like Vietnam and so on. And like Bangladesh is also doing so well in it. And we missed
[Amit Varma]: that bus completely. And maybe we'll never catch it because of automation. But people
[Amit Varma]: often don't think about agriculture as a big source of economic growth. And you point out
[Amit Varma]: at one point, and I'll quote from your piece, quote, what many of us have not noticed is
[Amit Varma]: that a labor intensive industry agriculture now yields greater exports than automobiles
[Amit Varma]: or garments plus textiles, stop quote. And you also talk about how you know, our self
[Amit Varma]: image at one point in time used to be hey, we're a country with a high population and
[Amit Varma]: food scarcity. That's completely changed. We can actually be an agricultural trade superpower
[Amit Varma]: of the world. Elaborate on that with me because it just seems to me to be a win win from every
[Amit Varma]: possible angle. It could reform our agricultural sector, it could give our farmers security
[Amit Varma]: and access to greater markets. And it would also be great for national pride, we could
[Amit Varma]: be feeding the world.
[Guest]: So there is an old strain of export pessimism in India. Okay, so it is the insecurity of
[Guest]: people in India that we think that we are clueless and we will not be able to compete
[Guest]: in world markets. And over and over this has been proved wrong in one field after another.
[Guest]: Manmohan Singh's PhD thesis in 1964 was one of the first intellectual products that questioned
[Guest]: export pessimism and made the argument that we are rational economic agents like everywhere
[Guest]: else in the world. And it's a matter of making prices work correctly and notably not having
[Guest]: central bank manipulation of the exchange rate. And then we will get the ability to
[Guest]: export just like anybody else.
[Guest]: So in this retreat away from export pessimism into a more optimistic frame of mind, today
[Guest]: in India, we see people like us feeling confident that we can do some modern things, that we
[Guest]: can do software, we can do some business process outsourcing, we can make automobile components
[Guest]: and we can make cars. Okay, that kind of confidence has seeped into India. But what my article
[Guest]: was hoping to point out is that actually there is a wonderful miracle that is going on, which
[Guest]: is agricultural exports from India. So in the 10 years leading up to 2016-17, we had
[Guest]: huge growth rates of agricultural export. And if you pause to think why, actually the
[Guest]: logic comes through very nicely. So one element is that given the Indian weather, land is
[Guest]: viable around the year. So there is good sunlight around the year and there is no difficulty
[Guest]: at any time of the year you can be doing agriculture. So the effective landmass available in India
[Guest]: is very large.
[Guest]: And the second idea is that a lot of modern high value agriculture is actually quite labor
[Guest]: intensive. It's difficult to mechanize making cotton. It's difficult to mechanize making
[Guest]: tomatoes. It's difficult to mechanize flowers and herbs and so on. So there are things that
[Guest]: are more industrializable like wheat, where frankly what you want is a one kilometer by
[Guest]: one kilometer farm and you want these gigantic machines which will do the whole thing. So
[Guest]: that is a very capital intensive form of agriculture. And the moment I say capital intensive and
[Guest]: labor intensive, I wish to appeal to trade theory. That's what trade theory is all about.
[Guest]: That you want to do capital intensive agriculture in a place like Canada, where people have
[Guest]: farms that are multiple square kilometers and millions of dollars of farm equipment
[Guest]: and with very little labor, they grow wheat. So wheat is really not our thing. We don't
[Guest]: have a competitive advantage in doing wheat. Where we have a competitive advantage is in
[Guest]: doing fruits, in doing vegetables, in doing animal husbandry and milk and so on.
[Guest]: So there is so much that can be done out of India where we can utilize the fact that actually
[Guest]: we have a large labor force. And so put all these pieces together, get to producing agricultural
[Guest]: goods, put them on planes, put them on ships, get them out to the world. This is not just
[Guest]: a hypothesis. This is the reality. As my article points out, we've had very high dollar values
[Guest]: and growth rates in this field. And this is something that India can do. So we should
[Guest]: not be so pessimistic. But then once again, it requires that we've got to get out of all
[Guest]: these distortions. The entrepreneurial genius of Punjab and Haryana should be devoted to
[Guest]: supplying tulips to Amsterdam and vegetables to Tokyo. Instead of that, we've got the lowest
[Guest]: value product of the whole world, namely wheat and rice being done in Punjab and Haryana.
[Guest]: And that is the failure of policy.
[Amit Varma]: That's extremely well put. And what you also kind of point out is that you talk about the
[Amit Varma]: four themes of internationalism in the context of agriculture. And one, of course, what you
[Amit Varma]: just pointed out is specialization that, you know, these are wheat and rice is not what
[Amit Varma]: we should be making in such quantities. And like you pointed out, you know, the farmers
[Amit Varma]: of Punjab supplying vegetables to Tokyo is quite a thought. But yeah, everybody will
[Amit Varma]: find the niche that is most profitable for themselves. What you also point out your second
[Amit Varma]: theme is on the political economy where you write, quote, the domestic policy process
[Amit Varma]: can degenerate into a dysfunctional political economy, where special interest groups dominate.
[Amit Varma]: Integrating into the global economy helps create a new dynamic. It becomes easier to
[Amit Varma]: form coalitions in India across many different special interest groups aligned around success
[Amit Varma]: in exporting, stop quote. So sort of elaborate on this a little bit for me, like what does
[Amit Varma]: the current landscape look like in terms of agricultural policy and interest groups? And
[Amit Varma]: how would that change if the incentives of all farmers suddenly change? If you know that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, international trade is encouraged and that there won't be arbitrary bans on
[Amit Varma]: X or Y, you know, how does the landscape change then?
[Guest]: This is an old idea from Jagdish Bhagwati and Kruger, D. N. Srinivasan, who observed
[Guest]: that when you get to exporting, it aligns domestic political economy in a more sensible
[Guest]: direction. So in an inward-looking economy, in a more self-reliant economy, in a more
[Guest]: import substitution economy, you tend to have a zero-sum game of local constituencies fighting
[Guest]: with each other to grab a bigger share of the pie. Whereas when you are outward-oriented,
[Guest]: when you're thinking that we have powerful lobbies in the country that are trying to
[Guest]: make more money by exporting, then the behavior of those lobbies is to scream at the policymakers
[Guest]: trying to resolve the bottlenecks that hold them back. And that creates a more positive
[Guest]: kind of political economy conflict. So applied into the field of agriculture, there are more
[Guest]: internationalized commodities in India, where frankly there is international trade and there's
[Guest]: better integration with the world economy. And there has been more sanity in those areas
[Guest]: as compared to the more inward-oriented areas where we fundamentally switch off the world
[Guest]: political economy and then you get the worst of the Indian political economy.
[Amit Varma]: And what you also pointed out is that, you know, at one point in that article, you write
[Amit Varma]: about how another facet of internationalism is sustained engagement, where you write,
[Amit Varma]: quote, many have commented on how India is seen as an unreliable seller owing to periodic
[Amit Varma]: bans on export. The problem runs much deeper than this. Exporting is not a simple matter.
[Amit Varma]: It requires developing complex organizational capital and business relationships. And later
[Amit Varma]: you write, our instinct of bans and unbans are born of the age of food insecurity. The
[Amit Varma]: world has changed. India's population is not able to consume the food that India grows,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. So, you know, at the policy level, if there is this sort of fundamental thinking
[Amit Varma]: that there is a suspicion of exports perhaps, or there is a sense that so many people in
[Amit Varma]: India are hungry, why should we allow exports? We should solve that first. You know, onion
[Amit Varma]: prices are so high, why should we allow the export of onions, which will make onion prices
[Amit Varma]: higher, which are entirely sort of wrong diagnosis of cause and effect, of course. But, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that kind of policy thinking is still entrenched or do you find that it is, is there hope of
[Amit Varma]: change happening there? And also, are farmers actually agitating for that kind of change?
[Guest]: This thinking is very entrenched. What I have written is unusual. There are a few economists
[Guest]: who are thinking in these ways. For me personally, it was Kirit Parekh who first opened my eyes
[Guest]: to the possibilities of international trade and agriculture. For me also, when I used
[Guest]: to have this schizophrenic idea that international trade is great for everything, but agriculture
[Guest]: is special. And it was Kirit Parekh who helped me to see that no, all the standard knowledge
[Guest]: and understanding of gains from trade, of international trade, of specialization applies
[Guest]: equally in the field of agriculture. And there are very big gains to be had by going down
[Guest]: that route. Jaswant Singh had a very nice phrase. He used to call it the psychology
[Guest]: of scarcity. He used to say that India has become big in some ways and we've not yet
[Guest]: lost the shackles of the mind where we think that there is scarcity. And I think that there's
[Guest]: a certain growing up that needs to take place in our mind. I would also like to coldly make
[Guest]: a distinction between hunger and agriculture. So there is a poverty problem in India. There's
[Guest]: no question that there is a poverty problem in India. And for an analogy, I would say
[Guest]: consider the United States. There is a poverty problem in the United States. There are many
[Guest]: people in the United States who go hungry. But the fact that there is hunger in the United
[Guest]: States does not in any way impinge on agriculture policy in the United States. They're two separate
[Guest]: problems. So yeah, we should do more to solve poverty problems. There are many, many elements
[Guest]: of how we can do things that will change poverty. Most notably, can we grow GDP? Can we expand
[Guest]: the overall pie so that humble, low-skilled jobs in India generate higher and higher wages?
[Guest]: There is a great discussion to be had around poverty. But for a moment, let me stick to
[Guest]: the counterpoint of consider a country like the UK. There is a poverty problem in the
[Guest]: UK. There are people in the UK going hungry. But that doesn't mean that you have to choke
[Guest]: exports of food from the UK to the European Union. They're two separate things. We don't
[Guest]: need to mix them up. We should understand these are private decisions. These are private
[Guest]: markets. So if I make bananas, I should have the ability to produce bananas with the best
[Guest]: focus and technology that I'm able to bring to it and develop supply chains through which
[Guest]: I'm able to sell bananas into the highest-priced outlet that I can somewhere in the world.
[Guest]: And that is the best thing that can happen to my income. And the fact that there is an
[Guest]: Indian buyer of bananas does not generate reasons to damage me. So if you just think
[Guest]: of the interests of every single farm producer, can we create conditions under which they
[Guest]: get the best possible realization? And when they do specialization and they change their
[Guest]: cropping patterns, most notably away from wheat and rice into other things, they will
[Guest]: actually get to higher value things. So it's in the interest of the farmers to do this.
[Guest]: And it's a bit of a mystery to me why this has gone wrong. And while I'm on this subject,
[Guest]: I also want to emphasize there are such giant opportunities in dairy and in meat. So this
[Guest]: is a vast country where there can be so much co-production of dairy. So I think India has
[Guest]: got a great thing going where the agricultural residue of every farm is used to keep six
[Guest]: cows. And we've got these sourcing networks where firms like Amul, firms like Britannia
[Guest]: run the entire machinery going deep into rural India where they are sourcing milk. And this
[Guest]: can easily turn into value-added things in the future, whether it is SMP, skim milk powder,
[Guest]: or it is cheese or whatever. There is such large opportunities to dominate the world
[Guest]: market in these things which are possible out of India.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And I'd again like to sort of underscore the almost counterintuitive point that the
[Amit Varma]: hunger problems that you see in India are not because of inadequate agricultural production.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, the statistic that I gave out in my last episode and that I wrote about
[Amit Varma]: at one point is that in India, 3000 children die of starvation every single day. That you
[Amit Varma]: know, more than one in four kids below a certain age is malnourished. There is clearly a hunger
[Amit Varma]: and food problem, but it's got nothing to do with agricultural production. It's got
[Amit Varma]: something to do with poverty. How you solve the problem of poverty is, like you said,
[Amit Varma]: the whole pie goes larger and the economy grows. And part of the puzzle of that is solving
[Amit Varma]: the problem of agriculture. And if agriculture grows massively, then you know, so will incomes
[Amit Varma]: at the bottom of the chain as well.
[Guest]: And also labor intensity. So if you are in Punjab growing wheat, then you will mechanize
[Guest]: it and there will be less employment for poor people. Whereas if you're in Punjab and you're
[Guest]: growing tulips, then you will have to hire more people because growing tulips is labor
[Guest]: intensive. So we've done the exactly wrong thing that we have by having barriers to trade.
[Guest]: We are doing capital intensive things of the kind that should just not be done in India.
[Guest]: It's an old story. We've seen this movie before in every other part of the country, but that
[Guest]: same movie is playing out in agriculture. That by opening up to international trade,
[Guest]: we will get a reallocation towards more labor intensity. And so the landowner in India will
[Guest]: hire more poor people to do agricultural work and thereby we will elevate the poverty problem.
[Amit Varma]: That's a profound point. Let's, you know, moving on from international trade. Now let's
[Amit Varma]: talk about trade within India, which is one of the things that the farm bills attempt
[Amit Varma]: to address. Tell me a little bit about what the sort of problems here were.
[Guest]: We in India built a grid of restrictions against the movement of agricultural commodities within
[Guest]: the country. Okay. And there are broadly two or three groups of interferences. So the first
[Guest]: and most famous interference is the APMC. Okay. So this is a 1950s idea. I have heard
[Guest]: that it was pushed by the World Bank into many countries, including India. And the idea
[Guest]: is that the government will create a monopoly spot market. So there is the Mandi that's
[Guest]: created where buying and selling shall be done. And of course the power of the state
[Guest]: is used so that you use state power to penalize anybody doing a transaction that is not at
[Guest]: the Mandi. So we've created this artificial monopoly called the Mandi. And then sure enough,
[Guest]: there's a bunch of people who exert disproportionate power at the Mandi and give very poor realizations
[Guest]: to the farmers. So this is one class of barriers which interferes with domestic trade. This
[Guest]: is the micro restriction. Then we have many, many barriers which interfere with the movement
[Guest]: of goods between states. Okay. And these range from outright bans to what are called technical
[Guest]: barriers in the field of international trade. So if you want to carry a truck of cotton
[Guest]: from Maharashtra to Karnataka, the Maharashtra government makes it difficult because somehow
[Guest]: the Maharashtra government has an idea that we want to double quotes reserve this cotton
[Guest]: for mills in Maharashtra. And I think this is a deeply, deeply pernicious idea. Okay.
[Guest]: The whole point of being the Republic of India is that we should have free movement of all
[Guest]: economic activities across the country. People should move, goods should move, and so on.
[Guest]: But there are many, many restrictions that hamper the movement of goods across the country.
[Guest]: Either they're explicit bans or they're all kinds of softer restrictions, which bottom
[Guest]: line generate interference into the freedom of trade. We see that quite vividly. For example,
[Guest]: when we look at the divergence of prices between locations in India. So the price of a product
[Guest]: in Pune versus the price of a product in Bhopal should be essentially the same within a band
[Guest]: which reflects the cost of transportation between Pune and Bhopal. Other than that,
[Guest]: there should be no differences. In fact, we see fairly large differences all across the
[Guest]: country. And this is because there are these restrictions on the movement of goods. So
[Guest]: this is the whole domestic trade agenda where partly we've created these little monopolies
[Guest]: called the APMCs, which interfere with the ability of somebody else to come in and talk
[Guest]: to a farmer and offer a better price. So why are we interfering in the economic freedom
[Guest]: of the farmer is something that beats me. I would even be okay if somebody said, here,
[Guest]: we'll build an APMC for you. And it's your choice that we use public money to build an
[Guest]: APMC. So we've got some physical facility and some handling of agricultural goods and
[Guest]: some way scales and storage and so on. And it's your choice that if you live X kilometers
[Guest]: away from this, it might be convenient for you to come there. How did we cross the line
[Guest]: to using coercion is something that beats me. In what universe are you better off coercing
[Guest]: a farmer, saying that if you dare to do a transaction at any place other than the APMC,
[Guest]: then the coercive power of the state will be used to inflict punishment upon you and
[Guest]: upon your counterparty. That to me is really something that is unethical. How could anybody
[Guest]: countenance this kind of thing? So these are the two elements of the domestic trade agenda.
[Guest]: Free movement of goods all across the country and the APMCs.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I can't resist an opportunity to do some share-o-shirey on the show. So
[Amit Varma]: just to talk about APMCs, which, you know, I had an episode with the farmer leader, Gunwant
[Amit Varma]: Patil, a couple of years back. And he told me about this great share, which Sharad Joshi,
[Amit Varma]: the great farmer leader, used to sort of, and this is something that a farmer is saying
[Amit Varma]: to a consumer, and I'll explain the context of this after I go through this, and it runs
[Amit Varma]: this way. To quickly translate for non-Hindi listeners, it translates this way, I die my
[Amit Varma]: friend and so do you. I die my friend and so do you. I sell my produce cheap and die.
[Amit Varma]: You pay so much that you die too. And the whole idea is that because of the APMC, the
[Amit Varma]: farmer is selling too cheap and the consumer is buying too expensive because the APMC is
[Amit Varma]: a monopsony. The only person who can buy from the farmer, a government mandated monopsony,
[Amit Varma]: you're not allowed to sell anywhere else. So therefore, what happens is they can set
[Amit Varma]: whatever price they want. Like at one point, I remember a report which spoke about how
[Amit Varma]: farmers would sell tomatoes to the APMC at two rupees a kg and consumers would buy them
[Amit Varma]: for 20 rupees. And this is just nuts. So you have the APMC taking 18 rupees, farmers are
[Amit Varma]: getting paid two bucks, consumers are paying 20 bucks. What you could instead have had
[Amit Varma]: is that if you had a competition of middlemen, and you could sell to whoever you wanted,
[Amit Varma]: the competition of middlemen would ensure a situation where, for example, the farmer
[Amit Varma]: instead of two rupees could sell his tomatoes for 10 bucks, and the consumer could buy them
[Amit Varma]: for 12 bucks. Farmer benefits by eight rupees, consumer benefits by eight rupees, enormous
[Amit Varma]: benefit. And we don't have that. And as far as you know, I can make out from this farm
[Amit Varma]: sales, they haven't even done away with the APMC. They've said the APMC is there as an
[Amit Varma]: option. But now you're allowed to sell anywhere else as well. Is that a correct understanding?
[Guest]: Yes. So this is a key point that for all practical purposes, there may be many parts in India
[Guest]: where a farmer is really stuck. And you have no choice but to go to the friendly neighborhood
[Guest]: APMC, which has land, which has facilities, where state power was used many years ago
[Guest]: in the establishment of the APMC. Once that is done, I would be the one complaining about
[Guest]: competition policy. I'd be saying that a few blocks are that APMC have market power and
[Guest]: we need to go do something about it. The only thing that we're fighting about right now
[Guest]: is don't make it illegal for somebody else to deal with the farmer directly. It's such
[Amit Varma]: a basic conception of economic freedom. Yeah. And also, you know, one criticism that has
[Amit Varma]: come about, you know, this particular reform, allowing the farmer to sell to anyone instead
[Amit Varma]: of forcing him to sell to one person. And one of the criticisms is that, oh, this is
[Amit Varma]: corporatization, corporates will take over, there'll be an Ambani and Adani monopoly,
[Amit Varma]: which seems to me to be a bizarre criticism. First of all, all these interactions between
[Amit Varma]: the farmers and whoever he or she is negotiating with, these are all voluntary interactions.
[Amit Varma]: And the farmer still has a choice of going to the APMC and selling at the MSP and so
[Amit Varma]: on. And it's just that you've expanded their choice, you've not taken anything away. And
[Amit Varma]: the other aspect of looking at it is that after the liberalization of 91, in which area
[Amit Varma]: which was liberalized, did you see a corporate monopoly squeezing the poor guy? Instead,
[Amit Varma]: what you had was, it was great for consumers, it was great for producers, it was great for
[Amit Varma]: suppliers, it was just fantastic all the way around. So I don't know where this criticism
[Amit Varma]: comes from and where you go from here to there.
[Guest]: So if some Ambani, Adani organizations actually reached out to some farmers and made bids
[Guest]: to them saying, I'll buy your tomatoes at four rupees, I would say, hey, how wonderful,
[Guest]: as compared to going to an APMC and selling the tomatoes at two rupees. So again, there
[Guest]: is no force. Nobody's forcing anybody to do anything. It's just removing the Indian state
[Guest]: from coercing farmers and anybody else that they might dare contract with saying that
[Guest]: this is illegal. That is something that is phenomenally bad and that is something that
[Guest]: is sought to be eliminated.
[Amit Varma]: And do these farm bills also do something about the second aspect of it, which, you
[Amit Varma]: know, interstate trading and trading anywhere else you want and, you know, accessing prices
[Amit Varma]: elsewhere. Do they also do something with regard to that?
[Guest]: It's a beginning on those things. So I see a long agenda on domestic trade that it will
[Guest]: not get solved overnight. So as an example, I talked about APMC. Okay, the fact is in
[Guest]: most regions of India, the APMC is the only game in town. So realistically, the APMC is
[Guest]: going to be an important part of this landscape for a while. And we need to do many, many
[Guest]: things. So I think of domestic trade as an agenda, as a journey where we will have to
[Guest]: fix many things. But, you know, you got to start somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And you've pointed to Article 301 elsewhere, where in one of your pieces, you wrote, quote,
[Amit Varma]: a key idea lies in utilizing Article 301 of the Constitution of India, which states that
[Amit Varma]: trade and commerce throughout India shall be free, stop quote. And therefore, it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me to my delight that all these restrictions which have existed on trade and commerce in
[Amit Varma]: the past are therefore unconstitutional, right?
[Guest]: Well, so let me look at this precisely in the present debates also. So there is a lot
[Guest]: of debate around agriculture as a state subject. Okay. And you know, my views, well, I am a
[Guest]: great admirer of the federal and decentralized nature of the Republic of India. And I'm always
[Guest]: looking for policy pathways in which we can deepen that decentralization, send more power
[Guest]: and more functions down to state governments and city governments, because that's really
[Guest]: the best way to organize this country. This country is too vast to be ruled by any one
[Guest]: union government or one new Delhi. So I'm very sympathetic to the decentralization agenda.
[Guest]: However, there is also an element in the Constitution and one that legitimately belongs, which is
[Guest]: on problems of interstate commerce. Okay. So in India, that is Article 301. For example,
[Guest]: in the United States, we would all tend to know that in the Constitution, there is this
[Guest]: issue about barriers to interstate commerce, that it is not okay to introduce barriers
[Guest]: to interstate commerce, either through federal law or through state law. So there is a union
[Guest]: government role in interfering with and disrupting barriers to interstate commerce. And that
[Guest]: is the legitimate domain of the union government. And these laws that have had restrictions
[Guest]: have in the past got approval of the president of India, because that was required as they
[Guest]: would have otherwise infringed on Article 301. So I just want to say that the laws that
[Guest]: are sought to be changed by these three farm bills had gone through the same Constitution
[Guest]: of India, had gone through approval of the president of India and of the union, because
[Guest]: this is the domain of the union. And today, the parliament is legislating in what is legitimately
[Guest]: the province of the parliament. So I do not think that there is anything being done that
[Guest]: is wrong. And if you will put a link to the paper, my colleagues and I wrote this paper
[Guest]: in 2015 and 2016, well before these bills were done. And two of my four co-authors,
[Guest]: Shubo Roy and Anirudh Burman are lawyers and have enormous specialized technical expertise
[Guest]: on these questions. And we feel quite clear that this is the domain, this is the legitimate
[Guest]: domain of the parliament in forming legislation.
[Amit Varma]: Great. Let us talk about the farm bills now. And it is very complicated and nuanced. And
[Amit Varma]: I want to talk about it in a number of different dimensions, some of which we will know less
[Amit Varma]: about than others. But nevertheless, one that you would know about quite thoroughly is the
[Amit Varma]: content of it. You know, that is a sort of first of four areas that I would like to address.
[Amit Varma]: So when it comes to the content of the farm bills, is there anything there that is problematic
[Amit Varma]: or short-sighted or goes in the wrong direction? Or would you say that it all broadly goes
[Amit Varma]: in the right direction? Like earlier, you said you're 90% in agreement with
[Amit Varma]: It all broadly goes in the right direction.
[Amit Varma]: It all broadly goes in the right direction. My other sort of criticism of this is the
[Amit Varma]: process because the one area where I find myself quite aghast is the way that it was
[Amit Varma]: pushed through parliament, the way that, you know, dissent is not engaged with, that anyone
[Amit Varma]: who protests is by default painted as anti-national. And just a vituperative tone of the response
[Amit Varma]: to criticism seems to me to be extremely anti-democratic. And at some level, I guess, there's a federalism
[Amit Varma]: argument also that in many of these areas, let the states make up their own mind. What
[Amit Varma]: is your sense of the process of this? Is there something that the government could have done
[Amit Varma]: differently? Is there a fundamental tendency within the government to think in a particular
[Amit Varma]: way, which has led to, you know, the bills being carried out like this? Because what
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me is that an essential component of liberalism, now understand that these bills,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that we understand liberalism in terms of increasing individual freedom
[Amit Varma]: and reducing state coercion, the content of the bills is fairly liberal, but the end doesn't
[Amit Varma]: always justify the means. And it seems to me that there is something deeply flawed with
[Amit Varma]: the means. What are your thoughts on that?
[Guest]: So I wish to say three things on this subject. The first is where we were a moment ago, that
[Guest]: there needs to be much more of a public policy debate and discourse. And this is true, not
[Guest]: just of agriculture, it is true of all fields. In my opinion, we in India are in a declining
[Guest]: phase of the intellectualism and the public debate and discourse surrounding a lot of
[Guest]: fields. We don't have much of a public sphere, and these bills emerge pristine from some
[Guest]: government person who drafts the bills. Okay. So, and I think that that's not a healthy
[Guest]: way to proceed. Partly from an intellectual point of view, that debate and discussion
[Guest]: always improves work. Okay. Nobody is smart enough to figure out these things. Okay. We
[Guest]: each of us, that if I was the policymaker, I would be the beneficiary from a vibrant
[Guest]: process of public discussion and debate. As I have been involved in many, many episodes
[Guest]: in the past, that the process of discussion, the process of debate, of putting something
[Guest]: up in 100 seminars and conferences, chips away at the ideas and refines ideas and makes
[Guest]: ideas better. So you get something that's a better quality product out of the process
[Guest]: of debate and discourse. And you end up politically sensitizing the broader community that, you
[Guest]: know, this kind of stuff is in the Bible. So I think that's very important. Otherwise
[Guest]: you suddenly spring surprises on people and, you know, needlessly that creates more of
[Guest]: a sudden allergic response. This is my, the first point I'd like to make. The second point
[Guest]: is also an economics point. And now I want to step back a little from these bills to
[Guest]: go after the bigger problem of Punjab and Haryana. And here I'm reporting the thought
[Guest]: process that I picked up in recent weeks through conversations with Vijay Kelkar. This is really
[Guest]: Kelkar's idea. So I have been a part of the conversations and I agree with the thought.
[Guest]: So Kelkar has been thinking that there is a weird equilibrium that Punjab and Haryana
[Guest]: particularly are locked into, which is a combination of everything that you described, that there
[Guest]: is free electricity, barriers to international trade, MSP. There's a whole machinery of farmers
[Guest]: in Punjab who are locked into wheat and rice and who don't know any other way. Okay. And
[Guest]: we must recognize the culpability, the complicity of the Indian state in doing this. And if
[Guest]: you wish to make moral arguments, then after the 60s, 64, 65 and 65, 66, two consecutive
[Guest]: droughts and see Subramaniam and the green revolution and all the amazing things that
[Guest]: were done in that period by policymakers, you could almost make the claim that, look,
[Guest]: it is Punjab and Haryana that protected the rest of India, that rescued the rest of India,
[Guest]: that bailed out India in a time of high population growth by producing those surges of agricultural
[Guest]: output that was so desperately required in India of that age. Otherwise we would be down
[Guest]: to PL 480 charity from the United States to eat. Okay. So that was a different time. And
[Guest]: at that time, maybe it made sense to orchestrate this electricity and MSP and high yielding
[Guest]: varieties and subsidized fertilizer to just get Punjab and Haryana to become the agricultural
[Guest]: heartland of India. And they fed the entire country. Now, there is a problem in abruptly
[Guest]: yanking that. Okay. So if you abruptly yank that, then it's not fair because it's a big
[Guest]: disruption that's placed upon everybody in Punjab and Haryana. If you change one piece
[Guest]: at a time, it's actually complicated because these are general equilibrium effects. There's
[Guest]: no guarantee that if you fix one restraint at a time, that you will actually get gains
[Guest]: in return for each one step at a time. That's a weird thing that happens with general equilibrium
[Guest]: reasoning that if you remove the fertilizer subsidy and the electricity subsidy and the
[Guest]: NREGS and the MSP and the domestic trade restrictions and the international trade restrictions and
[Guest]: the malfunctioning of the futures markets, if you remove all these together, then I have
[Guest]: no doubt that in two, three years, the system will find a new equilibrium where every farmer
[Guest]: will be better off. But along the way, when you go one step at a time, there's no guarantee
[Guest]: that things become better for the affected people. So you really need to see this as
[Guest]: a part of a fuller strategy that we are going to move towards a market-oriented, internationalized
[Guest]: agriculture. We're going to do it in these 10 steps over 10 years.
[Guest]: And Kelkar argues that this is a bit like a structural adjustment program that the IMF
[Guest]: and the World Bank put together for a country which has a horrendously messed up collection
[Guest]: of policies. So if you want to fix all those policies, imagine that for 10 years, we are
[Guest]: putting in public money to do direct cash transfers to individuals in Punjab and Haryana,
[Guest]: where that money tapers away over a 10-year period. And bit by bit, over a five-year period,
[Guest]: we are removing all these barriers. And through that way, we have managed an entire transition
[Guest]: to coming up to a new system.
[Guest]: So where we are going wrong today is that we've removed one piece, and we don't have
[Guest]: a game plan for the full thing. And the game plan for the full thing needs to bring the
[Guest]: worldview of a structural adjustment program, rather than just saying that, sorry, screw
[Guest]: you, we're just going to do all this. And that's not a very good way to do things in
[Guest]: a democracy.
[Guest]: And my last point is exactly where you left off, that politics is the art of negotiation.
[Guest]: Politics is the process of bringing people together and finding deals and finding contracts,
[Guest]: finding middle roads that make sense. And surely, there should have been ways to bring
[Guest]: people to the table and negotiate in good faith and find better outcomes, particularly
[Guest]: when the hand of cards is so good. These three bills are so good, they are only a step in
[Guest]: the correct direction. It's a failure of negotiation that it turned into so much anger and so much
[Guest]: unhappiness and so much partisan tribalism.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's a massive failure of negotiation and of politics. Two aspects of this which
[Amit Varma]: I want to kind of explore in a theoretical sense, where these specific bills are only
[Amit Varma]: an illustration. One is a political ramification of big changes. So let's say you need to,
[Amit Varma]: there are 10 changes you need to make together and then you know, everybody will be better
[Amit Varma]: off. But the problem is that it's not visible to everyone that they will be better off and
[Amit Varma]: they'd rather, you know, take the bird in hand and think about two in the bush right
[Amit Varma]: now, especially those who are beneficiaries of the current system, whether they are, you
[Amit Varma]: know, benefiting from the APMC monopsony or whatever. So then what happens is that anytime
[Amit Varma]: you try something like this, if the short term losers, even if they're winners in the
[Amit Varma]: long term, if the short term losers are going to kind of protest, then does that become
[Amit Varma]: a roadblock for any kind of significant reform? Because no matter what you do, somebody will
[Amit Varma]: feel that they're losing out in the short term. And in the partisan tribal atmosphere
[Amit Varma]: of our modern times, the entire opposition, whoever it is at that point in time, will
[Amit Varma]: rally around that particular aggrieved party and it then becomes difficult to move forward
[Amit Varma]: at all. Is there then a danger of policy paralysis because of politics?
[Guest]: So I think that it was Pratap Bhanumetha who said that when the ordinary consensual negotiation
[Guest]: approach to politics, where there is a constant conversation that is kept alive, when that
[Guest]: breaks down, then you're down to screaming in the streets as the only way out. So I feel
[Guest]: that there's a deeper problem that we've got to rebuild the quiet comfort of people in
[Guest]: the treasury benches talking to people in the opposition benches. Kelkar always says
[Guest]: that a political party should go into opposition, but it should never go out of power. That
[Guest]: opposition party should always have influence. They should always have a role. They should
[Guest]: have a say. And the art of doing democratic politics in a liberal democracy is to carry
[Guest]: people along. So this is something that we need to learn a lot more of what Vajpayee
[Guest]: used to call coalition dharma. Why India worked well in coalitions led by people like Vajpayee
[Guest]: or Gujarat or P. V. Narasimha Rao was that coalition dharma. Bring many people together,
[Guest]: talk, negotiate, talk, negotiate. I think that there's a certain Indian middle class
[Guest]: thing where we've started craving for a strong leader and somebody with that will just decisively
[Guest]: go do things. And I think that is fundamentally incompatible with the reasonable narration
[Guest]: of what liberal democracy is all about.
[Amit Varma]: Also strikes me like, for example, when GST was announced on GST, of course, was, in theory,
[Amit Varma]: something that would really help the economy and reduce a lot of the friction. And it was
[Amit Varma]: great, but it was so badly implemented that it caused a lot of damage and continues to
[Amit Varma]: cause damage to this day, much of which I see around me with all my friends who are
[Amit Varma]: entrepreneurs and have factories or had factories, because it's been so damaging. And the thought
[Amit Varma]: that struck me during that time is that even if you're moving from, say, one bad equilibrium
[Amit Varma]: to another better equilibrium, there is a transaction cost to that movement itself that
[Amit Varma]: in that movement, there can be so many unintended consequences and so many things going wrong,
[Amit Varma]: because of all kinds of reasons, because of factors outside your control, unknown, unknown
[Amit Varma]: state capacity, and so on, that in the end, you don't necessarily end up with either something
[Amit Varma]: that is better or with something that justifies the shift in the first place. Is this something
[Amit Varma]: that you think about while making policy? Because like the point that you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: is that you can't in something in a machinery where so many things are broken, there's no
[Amit Varma]: point piecemeal changing a couple of things here or three, four things here, you have
[Amit Varma]: to overhaul the entire thing. So how does one think about that? And, you know, it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me so daunting that just the daunting nature of what could happen is enough to make a politician
[Amit Varma]: or a bureaucrat say that, hey, let me just make incremental differences to the status
[Guest]: quo and try nothing drastic. So as somebody who was in the founding team of the GST in
[Guest]: India, it is indeed really troubling and humbling to see how things didn't quite work out, like
[Guest]: one would have anticipated. And I have no ready solution to how to play that GST kind
[Guest]: of episode better. We just lost institutional memory. There was a whole bunch of people
[Guest]: who knew about the GST. And then finally, when the negotiations were being done first
[Guest]: with Pranam Mukherjee and then with Jaitley, the basic knowledge of GST had been lost.
[Guest]: And so what was negotiated and what came out and what got implemented just seems to bear
[Guest]: no resemblance to the early conception of what a GST is all about. So I think it was
[Guest]: a failure of a policy community. And that takes you back to a deeper question, a bit
[Guest]: like what I'm saying about the problems of a health policy community in similar fashion.
[Guest]: We just did not have enough of a public finance policy community that would be able to think
[Guest]: deeply about the GST and stay on the ball and stay on message on the subject of GST
[Guest]: for 20 years, which is the kind of time horizon that is required to do that. That said, it's
[Guest]: actually much easier in the field of agriculture because the agenda in agriculture is a much
[Guest]: simpler agenda, what is sometimes called first generation reforms, which is just get the
[Guest]: state out of the way. Those are much easier reforms to execute.
[Guest]: So when all that has to be done is to have a stroke of the pen where there is a law which
[Guest]: removes the barrier against a foreign company having FDI in insurance. That's a very easy
[Guest]: reform. It's not a complicated reform. When associated with that, you need to do large
[Guest]: scale improvements in insurance law and the working and the capability of IRDA so that
[Guest]: these powerful, capable, hungry global insurance companies will not create a consumer protection
[Guest]: disaster in Indian insurance. That's more difficult because that's like a second generation
[Guest]: reforms agenda of building state capacity in insurance regulation.
[Guest]: In the case of agriculture, almost all of it is just get out of the way. So do not interfere
[Guest]: in international trade. Do not interfere in domestic trade. In the case of the futures
[Guest]: markets, yes, we do unfortunately need to develop state capacity at SEBI, and that's
[Guest]: indeed a difficult problem. So we'll have to learn how to become a financial markets
[Guest]: regulator in an organization like SEBI. We are not there. That is a complicated problem.
[Guest]: Similarly, in warehousing, all that the government has to do is don't interfere when people hold
[Guest]: goods in warehouses. This Essential Commodities Act that I'll put you in jail if you have
[Guest]: inventory of certain things. You know, we need to get out of the way. So a large part
[Guest]: of the agenda is just get out of the way. For that reason, implementation constraints
[Guest]: will not be a big problem other than commodity futures, where we need to do the FSLRC agenda
[Guest]: to get SEBI up to capabilities of stepping away from central planning and achieving high
[Guest]: rule of law. That is indeed unfinished business in terms of what is happening at SEBI.
[Guest]: But for the bulk of the agriculture landscape, it's just first generation reforms, freedom,
[Guest]: freedom, freedom. That's all that's required to be done. It's not difficult to implement.
[Amit Varma]: And what do you think of the way out of this current imbroglio? Like, you know, the BJP
[Amit Varma]: messed up the politics of this completely, which is a little bit of a surprise because
[Amit Varma]: they're normally not that bad at politics, but clearly they didn't foresee this coming
[Amit Varma]: and they messed it up completely. Now, what's the way out of this? Because on the one hand,
[Amit Varma]: you have these deep partisan entrenched positions where the government is saying that these
[Amit Varma]: farmers are anti-nationals, which to me is like, just beyond the pale. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: at the same time, that's sort of deepened the resolve of the farmers also. And there's
[Amit Varma]: a lot of rhetoric and misinformation on all sides. What is a reasonable way out? And is
[Guest]: there a reasonable way out?
[Guest]: So I find it heartbreaking that the bills that I consider so aligned with the interests
[Guest]: of farmers are turning into an angry farmer's movement. The only word I want to use is heartbreaking
[Guest]: that, you know, how could we come to some place that is so wrong? And I think that we've
[Guest]: got to go back to basics in terms of the healing, that we've got to rediscover humanity in each
[Guest]: other. We've got to learn to talk across the aisle. We've got to grow collaboration muscle.
[Guest]: We've got to grow coordination muscle. We've got to grow negotiation muscle and come back
[Guest]: into these things in a more quiet environment where the temperature is dialed down and people
[Guest]: are able to talk to each other in good faith. Because we should see that these bills are
[Guest]: not the beginning and the end of agricultural reform. There's so much else that's waiting
[Guest]: to be done. And our ability to do a complex 20-year re-engineering through which India
[Guest]: becomes an agricultural trade powerhouse and we generate giant gains in production and
[Guest]: incomes of farmers, that whole process stands to get disrupted if the temperature becomes
[Guest]: so high. So it seems to me that the need of the hour is really, you know, to be like Gandhiji
[Guest]: after a horrible episode like Noakhali where you try to bring people together and you say
[Guest]: that being good to each other is even more important than doing the right things at an
[Guest]: intellectual and a policy space.
[Amit Varma]: What does that mean in concrete terms? Does it mean the Modi government going to the farmers
[Amit Varma]: and saying that, okay, relax, we let it be for now? And what are the demands of the farmers
[Amit Varma]: that they are not agreeing to? For example, now I haven't studied this in detail. So I'll
[Amit Varma]: ask you that the farmers apparently wanted a guarantee within the bill that the MSPs
[Amit Varma]: would continue. Now, in the short term, I don't really see the harm of this because
[Amit Varma]: as long as you allow trade elsewhere, the MSPs have been there forever, they're going
[Amit Varma]: to continue to be there if these bills don't pass. So let them be there for a while till
[Amit Varma]: they are unnecessary, which markets would surely ensure, right? Or is my understanding
[Guest]: of it flawed?
[Guest]: I think that when you get temperatures that are this high, there's something deeper that's
[Guest]: going on. When you and I are engaged in a screaming match, it's not the words that we
[Guest]: say to each other. There's something else that's going on. It's a deeper estrangement.
[Guest]: We have lost trust. We've lost confidence in each other. We've lost the presumption
[Guest]: of good faith. So I actually don't think that there is a need of a discussion around whether
[Guest]: you should enshrine MSP in the bills or not. What is needed is a hundred episodes where
[Guest]: people from both sides will break bread with each other and be kind to each other, be good
[Guest]: to each other and learn to trust each other. It's a process of conversation. It's a process
[Guest]: of emotionally building bridges and not trying to stake out a power claim this way or that.
[Guest]: That is the path to building the republic and living with each other in a liberal democracy.
[Guest]: So as an old saying goes, democracy is the art of living with each other without coming
[Guest]: to blows. And we have come to blows in this. And in my mind, that is abhorrent. It's more
[Guest]: important to be civil and be kind to each other than to get economic reforms done.
[Amit Varma]: That's a fair point. And you know, I buy that point that it's not about this compromise
[Amit Varma]: or that compromise. It's about the general approach that you take towards each other.
[Amit Varma]: But there it seems that those bridges have kind of been burned. I mean, it seems to me,
[Guest]: doesn't it?
[Guest]: So the solution is then to go back to basics and rebuild those bridges. How do you do that?
[Guest]: So again, let's go, let's look at the emotional climate around the storming of the Golden
[Guest]: Temple and then the murder of Indira Gandhi and then a pogrom against Sikhs in Delhi.
[Guest]: And then think of the next 10-20 years, there was a process of building bridges. We have
[Guest]: clawed back from that precipice all the way to the point where Manmohan Singh became finance
[Guest]: minister and Monte Kaluwalia was finance secretary. And, you know, then Manmohan Singh became
[Guest]: prime minister and, you know, we healed those wounds. So these things can be done. But it's
[Guest]: got to be done at a hundred levels in the political system and as human beings with
[Guest]: each other, because that is the only way to go forward. Country cannot survive with this
[Guest]: level of anger simmering inside.
[Amit Varma]: So thinking aloud, it seems to me that a good way to proceed would possibly be for the government
[Amit Varma]: to say something like, okay, we'll keep these bills in abeyance for some time. We'll bring
[Amit Varma]: you to the table. Let's talk it out. Let's thrash it out. And until you are okay with
[Amit Varma]: it, we won't reintroduce those bills. Is that a good beginning step? And is it even remotely
[Amit Varma]: realistic given the sort of, you know, how it's almost become a prestige ki baat, as
[Guest]: it were?
[Guest]: So I have no judgment on how this story will unfold. But if I had to offer my two bits
[Guest]: of wisdom, this is what I would say, that what we need is a lot of people hugging each
[Amit Varma]: other.
[Amit Varma]: Okay. You know, suddenly from talking of concrete economic first principles and sort of incentives
[Amit Varma]: and this and that, we come down to almost, you know, you're sounding like a new age guru.
[Amit Varma]: So no, so, you know, thank you so much for coming on the show. It's again been enlightening
[Amit Varma]: and you've given me and possibly our listeners lots to think about. And I hope to have you
[Amit Varma]: back on the show soon at some point, maybe to talk about healthcare, who knows, and maybe
[Amit Varma]: to describe how the process of hugging came to be and what were the incentives that led
[Amit Varma]: to mass hugs erupting around the country, though somehow I don't think we'll get to
[Amit Varma]: that episode too soon. So thanks, Ajay.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to The Show Notes, where I have
[Amit Varma]: provided enough resources for you to enter a rabbit hole. All my views on the subject,
[Amit Varma]: Ajay's views on the subject, the episodes I've done with experts in the past, and so
[Amit Varma]: on. You can follow Ajay on Twitter at Ajay underscore Shah. You can follow me at Amit
[Amit Varma]: Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A, and you can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at
[Amit Varma]: SeenUnseen.in. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Seen and The Unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to SeenUnseen.in slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.